                                                                                                       www.nature.com/scientificreports




                OPEN              Numerical and experimental
                                  investigation of multi‑species
                                  bacterial co‑aggregation
                                  Meisam Soleimani 1*, Szymon P. Szafranski 2, Taoran Qu 2, Rumjhum Mukherjee 2,
                                  Meike Stiesch 2, Peter Wriggers 1 & Philipp Junker 1

                                  This paper deals with the mathematical modeling of bacterial co-aggregation and its numerical
                                  implementation in a FEM framework. Since the concept of co-aggregation refers to the physical
                                  binding between cells of different microbial species, a system composed of two species is considered
                                  in the modeling framework. The extension of the model to an arbitrary number of species is
                                  straightforward. In addition to two-species (multi-species growth) dynamics, the transport of a
                                  nutritional substance and the extent of co-aggregation are introduced into the model as the third and
                                  fourth primary variables. A phase-field modeling approach is employed to describe the co-aggregation
                                  between the two species. The mathematical model is three-dimensional and fully based on the
                                  continuum description of the problem without any need for discrete agents which are the key
                                  elements of the individual-based modeling approach. It is shown that the use of a phase-field-based
                                  model is equivalent to a particular form of classical diffusion-reaction systems. Unlike the so-called
                                  mixture models, the evolution of each component of the multi-species system is captured thanks
                                  to the inherent capability of phase-field modeling in treating systems consisting of distinct multi-
                                  phases. The details of numerical implementation in a FEM framework are also presented. Indeed, a
                                  new multi-field user element is developed and implemented in ANSYS for this multiphysics problem.
                                  Predictions of the model are compared with the experimental observations. By that, the versatility
                                  and applicability of the model and the numerical tool are well established.


                                   Most bacteria inhabiting the human mouth exhibit physical cell-to-cell recognition and binding of organisms
                                   coming from different representative taxa, ­see1,2,3 ­and4. This phenomenon is called co-aggregation if it occurs
                                   in suspension and it is called co-adhesion if it involves immobilized microorganisms. These microorganisms
                                   co-adhere to each other using high number of attachment points and special physical interactions, thus stay-
                                   ing in close proximity to each other. Physical interactions are evolutionarily conserved in oral microorganisms
                                   because they protect microbial cells from being washed away from the oral surface by the constant flow of saliva
                                   and consequently being swallowed by the h    ­ ost5. Primary colonizers can bind to oral surfaces, while secondary
                                   colonizers must rely on other organisms to be recruited into the sessile community.
                                       Interspecies cell-cell binding occurs rapidly and usually in a very specific manner as proved by co-aggregation
                                   assays performed for multiple strains representing a broad range of oral ­species2. Testing inhibitory substances/
                                  conditions and/or genetic studies revealed that most often co-aggregation is mediated by a carbohydrate-binding
                                  protein called lectin on one cell type that interacts with a complementary carbohydrate receptor on the other
                                  cell type. Other surface components, like outer membrane proteins, hemagglutinins and sialic acid-containing
                                  receptors, can also be involved in a co-aggregation p  ­ rocess6. Microorganisms take advantage of proximal location
                                   facilitated by physical contact, to co-evolve and develop bidirectional beneficial relationships. Close distance
                                   between interacting cells supports cross-feeding, cross-protection, gene transfer, and cell-cell signaling, ­see3,7,8
                                  ­and9. Hence, co-aggregation plays a pivotal role in oral biofilm development by governing the sequential recruit-
                                   ment of different species, their spatial distribution and ecology. Recently, a cell-by-cell succession model was
                                   extended to encompass direct adhesion of co-aggregates, ­see10. Interestingly, in vitro biofilm initiated by aggre-
                                  gates expanded more rapidly compared to biofilms developing from single cells. Dental plaque is the most exten-
                                  sively investigated biofilm in this regard. It is known that more than 500 species contribute to the formation of
                                  human dental plaque. Streptococci and actinomyces are the major and primary colonizers of the tooth s­ urface11.



                                  1
                                  Institute of Continuum Mechanics (IKM), Leibniz Universität Hannover, Hannover, Germany. 2Medical School
                                  Hannover (MHH), Hannover, Germany. *email: soleimani@ikm.uni-hannover.de


Scientific Reports |   (2023) 13:11839                | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-38806-2                                                    1

                                                                                                                                                 Vol.:(0123456789)
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                                 From a clinical perspective, the development and uncontrolled expansion of oral biofilms can lead to diverse
                                             pathologies, primarily local but potentially with subsequent systemic complications. Oral biofilms are responsible
                                             for the most prevalent infectious disease worldwide, dental caries and periodontal disease, and the most com-
                                             mon implant-associated complications, peri-implant diseases. Odontogenic complications include pathologies
                                             at diverse anatomic locations including the cardiovascular system, gut, respiratory tract, reproductive tract, or
                                             even brain. Physical contact between biofilm members contributes to biofilm structure that facilitates higher
                                             resistance to immune response and antimicrobial treatment. On the one hand, co-aggregation can directly con-
                                             tribute to virulence in a process of synergistic ­invasion12 or invader ­recruitment13. On the second hand, receptors
                                            involved in co-aggregation can be used to target pathogens, with the use of antimicrobials and p       ­ robiotics14. Given
                                             the critical role of cell-cell contact in biofilm development and maturation, it can be speculated that a better
                                             understanding of this process could result in improved prophylaxis and anti-biofilm therapy. Yet, the holistic
                                             approach to oral microbial ecology is challenged by the high diversity and complexity of microbial communities.
                                             High-resolution numerical simulations can help to overcome current methodological limitations and improve
                                             a system-level understanding of oral biofilms.
                                                 The mathematical modeling and numerical simulation of bacterial colonies (biofilms) have drawn a great
                                             deal of attention among researchers over the last two decades. In particular, the spatiotemporal evolution of
                                             bacterial aggregates is of great interest in the computational biomechanics community. A common and favorable
                                             modeling scheme is Individual-based modeling (IBM) which is very flexible in terms of accommodating complex
                                             interactions between the discrete agents as well as sophisticated biological, chemical, and physical processes
                                             associated with a single cell such as microbial cell division, decay, motility, etc. Moreover, this approach is read-
                                             ily scalable in the sense that an extremely large number of microbial populations can be handled using parallel
                                             solvers and domain decomposition due to the explicit nature of their time integration scheme. As the outcome
                                             of such endeavors, one can name several open-source computer codes such as ­iDynoMiCS15 and ­Simbiotics16,
                                            ­NUFEB17 and also M     ­ IRODIM18,19 which are capable of simulating the development of microorganism in a multi-
                                            dimensional and multi-species fashion. IBMs are normally of hybrid type meaning that besides the bacterial
                                            species, which are treated as discrete agents, the nutrient availability is described using a continuum approach.
                                            Along with IBMs, fully continuum-based modeling of biofilms is also mathematical modeling and the numerical
                                            simulation of the multi-species biofilms have not yet been sufficiently considered in the literature. Although most
                                            species that constitute dental plaque are known individually, their collective behavior and group interactions
                                            are still under investigation. In order to understand the spatiotemporal structure of such a bacterial community
                                            one has to identify and understand the interaction, partnership and communication among the members of
                                            this community. In particular, the mathematical modeling of such phenomena is really sparse in the literature.
                                                 When it comes to mathematical modeling, the growth of biofilms can be viewed from two different per-
                                            spectives. In the first approach, the growth is described as volume expansion and consequently, a “mechanical
                                            movement” of the boundary of the growing matter. This “explicit” movement of the biofilm can be captured,
                                            in the simplest fashion, using a potential flow which is isotropic, see for e­ xample20 ­and21. Alternatively, in a
                                            more complex framework, one can use anisotropic kinematics that governs the deformation of the biofilm as
                                            a deformable viscoelastic solid instead of a fluid, s­ ee22 ­and23. This notion of growth has also been employed to
                                             model various growth phenomena in soft tissues other than bacterial aggregates. Examples are tumor g­ rowth24,
                                             and aneurysm as a result of abnormal arterial ­growth25. In the second approach, the growth of biofilm can be
                                            characterized using the “propagation” of a phase-field variable. A classical example is the classical diffusion-
                                            reaction equation in which the propagation of the wavefront can be interpreted as the growth of the colony of
                                            species, ­see26,27,28–30. Another example is Fisher’s ­equation31 which is, indeed, a transient diffusion-reaction model
                                             for predicting population dynamics and pattern formation. One can generalize this framework by using a set
                                             of diffusion-reaction equations in order to account for different reciprocal interactions, such as symbiosis or
                                             competition, between multiple species. For instance, the diffusional Lotka-Volterra ­system32 is associated with
                                             a set of PDEs capable of describing the interaction between two species which are, in fact, prey and predator.
                                                 In this work, we use the second approach in order to mathematically describe a system composed of two
                                             different bacterial species which not only grow but also co-aggregate in the presence of each other. Moreover, it
                                             is shown that this approach is exactly equivalent to employing a so-called “phase-field” model for capturing the
                                             behavior of such biological systems. The mathematical model is implemented using a fully implicit and mono-
                                             lithic scheme within a FEM framework. A multi-physics user element is developed from scratch to be invoked by
                                             the ANSYS solver. Several numerical examples are presented to show the robustness of the proposed numerical
                                             tool in handling multi-species biological systems.

                                            Mathematical modeling of the co‑aggregation of two bacterial species
                                            From a biological point of view, co-aggregation is a crucial process in the formation of multi-component bio-
                                            films. Genetically distinct bacteria adhere to each other, ’co-aggregate’, and can replicate faster, s­ ee33. Due to
                                            co-aggregation, the metabolism of the species is altered compared to the monocultures, s­ ee3. In order to math-
                                            ematically describe the development of biofilm under the influence of co-aggregation, the basic assumptions are:

                                            • Two species of bacteria are taken into consideration. One can readily extend the model to multiple species
                                              without any restriction.
                                            • For the sake of simplicity, only a single nutrient is assumed to nourish both species. The nutrient is, indeed,
                                              dissolved in the fluid surrounding the biofilm. One can extend the model to multiple nutrients.
                                            • Since the fluid flow is not modeled explicitly, the transport of the nutrient is governed by the diffusion mecha-
                                              nism. This is in line with a very small flow velocitythat is either induced by the biofilm growth (in the order
                                              of a few microns per day) or governed by quasi-hydrostatic conditions. As a result, the advection mechanism


          Scientific Reports |   (2023) 13:11839 |                https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-38806-2                                                         2

Vol:.(1234567890)
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                      for the transport is neglected. Such a situation can occur in specific anatomic locations, e.g., deep pockets
                                      around implants or teeth, where salivary flow is strongly reduced.a very small Peclet number (Pe) allows
                                      such simplification regarding the transport mechanism. One can estimate that Pe = Advection          rate  Lu
                                                                                                                                Diffusion rate = D → 0
                                      in which L, u and D refer to the characteristic length, characteristic fluid velocity, and nutrient diffusivity,
                                      respectively.
                                  •   The generation of so-called byproducts, as a result of the metabolic activities of the bacteria, is not modeled
                                      explicitly. It is known that metabolic products, such as lactic acid, can have either a negative or positive influ-
                                      ence on the growth of different components in multi-species s­ ystems34.
                                  •   The model of the co-aggregation is mathematically based on the “proximity” of species. Irrespective of the
                                      underlying biological mechanism, the model assumes that bacterial growth is boosted if particular species
                                      are “sufficiently close” to each other. In this sense, co-aggregation can be perceived as cooperation.
                                  •   It is postulated that the growth of a biofilm colony is in the direction of the maximum nutrient gradient. It
                                      will be clarified more in the mathematical description of the proposed phase-field model.
                                  •   The initial seeds of species are randomly generated in the geometrical model. The model does not capture the
                                      very early colonization of the surface by the planktonic bacteria. Such a process needs to be modeled using
                                      agent-based methods with regard to the length scale of bacteria and the surface roughness, s­ ee35.

                                  The mathematical model is based on these assumptions. For the sake of simplicity, the schematic view of the
                                  computational domain is considered to be two-dimensional. The variables φ1 and φ2 are taken to represent
                                  species 1 and 2 respectively. These two variables can be perceived as the density of bacteria. If they are equal to
                                  zero at a certain location, it implies the absence of that species. Finally, the sharp interface between zero-valued
                                  and one-valued regions characterizes the boundary of the species. Figure 1 depicts the regions where φ1 and φ2
                                  change spatially.
                                       One can see that both species may coexist (both φ1 and φ2 amount to 1) in certain regions. Such regions are
                                  exactly the aggregation zones. The aggregation is captured using a new variable called α. This variable can be
                                  evaluated by applying a Boolean operation of “AND” type on φ1 and φ2. This variable is treated like a phase-field
                                  variable. It means that α = 1 corresponds to the regions in which both φ1 and φ2 are present and consequently
                                  the co-aggregation can take place.
                                       Finally, the concentration of the nutrient is denoted by the variable c that obeys a diffusion-reaction equation.
                                  It is obvious that the regions occupied by one of the species, namely φ1 and/or φ2 equal to 1, play the role of sink
                                  term (reaction) in the diffusion-reaction equation. Furthermore, the values of nutrients on the boundaries can
                                  be prescribed/controlled in the context of boundary conditions.

                                  Phase‑field type equations for species and co‑aggregation. As mentioned before, the variable α is
                                  captured using a phase-field equation. The well-known Allen–Cahn36 type of phase-field equation can be writ-
                                  ten as
                                                                                                 2 2
                                                          ˙
                                                          
                                                                  =      −f ′ ()     +    ε ∇
                                                                                                        +      S(, c)    ,
                                                                                                                 
                                                   Phase evolution      Bulk contribution   Sharp interface   Driver (source)                        (1)
                                                in dimensionless time                        contribution      of phase-field
                                  in which the generic variable  can be replaced by either φ1, φ2 or α. The dot over  in the first term signifies
                                  the time derivative. The parameter ε regularizes the sharp change of φ between the two phases. f ′ () is a short
                                               ∂f ()
                                  notation for ∂ . The function f () is a so-called double-well potential and characterizes the barrier that has
                                  to be overcome in order to have a phase transformation (here, phase transformation means a region that used
                                  to be free of species, namely  = 0, is colonized by that species, namely  = 1). The description of each term in
                                  the equation is self-explanatory and standard in any application of phase-field modeling.
                                      A common choice for the double well potential is




                                  Figure 1.  Phase-field approach for a multi-species system, φ1 and φ2 represent species 1 and species 2 while α
                                  refers to the congregation state.



Scientific Reports |   (2023) 13:11839 |                https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-38806-2                                                     3

                                                                                                                                                  Vol.:(0123456789)
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                                                                             f () = 2M2 (1 − )2 ,                                                   (2)
                                            in which M is proportional to the local maximum of the function at φ = 12 between the two wells (minima) at
                                             = 1 and  = 0, see Fig. 2. By degenerating the problem to 1D one can better understand the idea behind the
                                            phase-field approach. Neglecting the time-dependent as well as the source
                                                                                                                     term, in 1D, one can realize that the so-
                                                                                                                                  2
                                            called wavefront function φ = 21 (1 − Tanh( xl ) satisfies Eq. (1). Here l = M       ε
                                                                                                                                     characterizes clearly the “interface
                                            width”. It captures a smooth but sharp transition
                                                                                           √         between  the two phases.  In  a similar fashion, one can show that
                                            the “interface energy” is proportional to ε2 M . In other words, it represents the resistance against phase change.
                                            If the driving force (the last term in Eq. 1) overcomes this threshold, the phase change takes place. Actually, ε
                                            and M are characteristic parameters that govern the underlying physical process pertaining to the phase-field
                                            equation. The readers are referred t­ o37 for more elaboration on the structure of the phase-field equation.
                                                As stated before, the co-aggregation ( α) can be captured using the phase-field equation. It is noteworthy to
                                            mention that this type of phase-field modeling is, in fact, a transient diffusion-reaction equation. To restore the
                                            classical diffusion-reaction equation one can eliminate the term concerning double well potential (by setting
                                            M = 0). In fact, the evolution of the two species’ density is governed by the classical diffusion-reaction equation.
                                            To do so, one can substitute  for φ1 or φ2 and set M = 0.
                                                The crucial part of the phase-field equation is the definition of the source terms for each field. The source
                                            terms corresponding to the four variables φ1 , φ2 , α, c are denoted by S1 (φ1 , α, c), S2 (φ2 , α, c), Sα (φ1 , φ2 , α, c) and
                                            Sc (φ1 , φ2 , c), respectively. That gives rise to the evolution of the system. Its mathematical representation needs to
                                            be physically meaningful. As stated in the assumptions, the “physically meaningful rationale” is that the expan-
                                            sion of bacterial colonies is preferred in the direction of maximum nutrient change, namely nutrient gradient.
                                            Nutrient metabolism provides energy and building blocks for all cell replications. Consequently, in locations
                                            where access to nutrients is hindered, replication is slower or stops completely. In the following, appropriate
                                            source terms are considered.
                                                The function S1 (φ1 , α, c) can be proposed as
                                                                                  S1 (φ1 , α, c) = Rs1 H(φ1 − φcri )(1 + τ α)φ1 c,                                     (3)
                                            where Rs1 is a parameter that controls the magnitude of the source term and τ characterizes the degree of growth
                                            promotion due to coaggregation. It is hypothesized that the growth (bacterial replication) is boosted if α is
                                            evolved (co-aggregation takes place). As long as different species have positive effects on each others’ fitness/
                                            growth, closer proximity introduced by co-aggregation can facilitate stronger synergy. The function H(φ1 − φcri )
                                            is the Heaviside step function with a jump at critical value φcri . A general definition of H(· − ·cri ) with a jump
                                            at ·cri is
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                        1 If · ≤ ·cri
                                                                                       H(· − ·cri ) =
                                                                                                        0 If · > ·cri
                                                                                                                      .                                       (4)

                                            One can interpret the parameter φcri as the minimum level of bacterial density that prevents the bacterial colonies
                                            from vanishing, in the long run. The source term, which can be interpreted as bacterial replication, is proportional
                                            to bacterial density and nutrient availability. The source term for species 2 is similar to species 1
                                                                                  S2 (φ2 , α, c) = Rs2 H(φ2 − φcri )(1 + τ α)φ2 c.                                     (5)
                                            The source term for the co-aggregation variable α can be written as




                                            Figure 2.  Double well potential f (φ).




          Scientific Reports |   (2023) 13:11839 |                 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-38806-2                                                            4

Vol:.(1234567890)
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                                                                                                       ∇α · ∇c
                                                                 Sα (φ1 , φ2 , α, c) = Rα H(φ1 − φcri )H(φ2 − φcri )           ,                      (6)
                                                                                                                        |∇c|
                                  in which the term |∇c|
                                                      ∇c
                                                         is a unit vector pointing to the direction of maximum change in the nutrient. This is, indeed,
                                  the preferred direction for the expansion of colonies. Taking a closer look at the structure of Sα (φ1 , φ2 , α, c), one
                                  can notice that it serves as an advection term in the form of v · ∇α1 and v = Rα ∇c being the advection velocity.
                                                                                                                          |∇c|
                                  It means that the boundary of the bacterial colonies at the co-aggregation zone is advected in the direction of v.
                                      For the nutrient c, the source term should be negative, because the nutrient is consumed.
                                                                               Sc (φ1 , φ2 , c) = −Rc (φ1 + φ2 )c,                                    (7)
                                  in which the parameter Rc is the consumption parameter. Obviously, the transport of the nutrient is governed by
                                  the standard and classical time-independent diffusion-reaction equation ( M = 0). For the nutrient, the parameter
                                  ε2 in Eq. (1) is, in fact, the nutrient diffusivity. To make a distinction, we replace ε2 with Dn and Db in the case of
                                  nutrient and bacterial species, respectively.

                                  Method
                                  All methods were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations.

                                  Numerical implementation using FEM.             Since the adopted numerical method is based on the standard
                                  Galerkin FEM, one needs to convert the differential equations into their respective weak forms. One can express
                                  the weak form of four governing equations for the existing four unknowns (φ1, φ2, α and c) as follows:
                                                           
                                                                                                              
                                                                (Db ∇ · ∇φ1 )δφ1 − S1 (φ1 , α, c)δφ1 + φ̇1 δφ1 dv = 0,                        (8)
                                                                 B

                                                                
                                                                                                                   
                                                                      (Db ∇ · ∇φ2 )δφ2 − S2 (φ2 , α, c)δφ2 + φ̇2 δφ2 dv = 0,                          (9)
                                                                 B

                                                          
                                                                 2                                                      
                                                                 (ε ∇ · ∇α)δα + f ′ (α)δα − Sα (φ1 , φ2 , α, c)δα + α̇ δα dv = 0,                    (10)
                                                            B

                                                                     
                                                                         [Dn ∇ · (∇c)δc + Sc (φ1 , φ2 , c)δc + ċ δc] dv = 0.                        (11)
                                                                     B

                                  One should note that variation of the variables ( δφ1 , δφ2 , δα, δc ) serve as the test function in the context of
                                  variational approach. Furthermore, (·) acting between the variable gradients is indeed the inner product. In
                                  line with standard FEM, the objective is to find the field variables with so-called C0 continuity . Upon applying
                                  integration by parts to the integrals in Eqs. (8)–(11), the boundary terms defined on the boundary ∂B emerge.
                                  Furthermore, a backward (implicit) Euler scheme is used for the time discretization which replaces the time
                                  derivatives. This yields
                                                                                                               
                                                                       φ1 − φ1n−1
                                                    Db ∇φ1 · ∇δφ1 +                δφ1 − S1 (φ1 , α, c)δφ1 dv =        Db ∇φ1 · N δφ1 ds,       (12)
                                                B                          �t                                      ∂B


                                                                                                               
                                                                          φ2 − φ2n−1
                                                    Db ∇φ2 · ∇δφ2 +                  δφ2 − S2 (φ2 , α, c)δφ2 dv =     Db ∇φ2 · N δφ2 ds,             (13)
                                               B                             �t                                    ∂B

                                                                                                             
                                                2                     α − α n−1
                                                             ′
                                               ε ∇α · ∇δα + f (α)δα +           δα − Sα (φ1 , φ2 , α, c)δα dv =     ε2 ∇α · N δα ds,                 (14)
                                            B                            �t                                      ∂B

                                                                                                            
                                                                                             c − c n−1
                                                          Dn ∇c · δ∇c + Sc (φ1 , φ2 , c)δc +           δc dv =     Dn ∇c · N δc ds,                  (15)
                                                       B                                        �t              ∂B

                                   where N is the normal vector of the boundary surface. It is an acceptable assumption that the boundary flux term
                                  for the phase-field is assumed to be zero. Moreover, D∇c · N refers to the nutrient flux at the boundary. The super-
                                  script (n − 1), which appears due to time discretization, refers to the values of variables at the previous time step.
                                      The implementation of the multi-field (species 1, species 2, co-aggregation, and nutrient concentration) three-
                                  dimensional problem at hand was carried out using AceGen, s­ ee38, which is based on automatic differentiation
                                  (hybrid symbolic/numeric differentiation). Once the weak forms are linearized, the stiffness matrix is extracted
                                  and tailored to a user element in the FORTRAN language that can be implemented in any FEM code using stand-
                                  ard discretization schemes. The numerical test cases are performed on two-dimensional models for the sake of
                                  computational efficiency. Due to the nature of phase-field equations, one needs to use sufficiently fine mesh. Even
                                  in two-dimensional examples, a mesh size of 0.5 µm leads to approximately 2 × 104 nodes which means around


Scientific Reports |   (2023) 13:11839 |                 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-38806-2                                                     5

                                                                                                                                                   Vol.:(0123456789)
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                            8 × 104 degrees of freedom (DoF) in the final model. One can easily understand that for a three-dimensional
                                            model with the same mesh size, the total number of DoFs exceeds 107 and is computationally prohibitive.
                                                Each node of the FEM mesh has four degrees of freedom all of which are scalar-valued. The first and second
                                            ones are dedicated to φ1 and φ2 representing the density of species 1 and species 2, respectively. The third is α
                                            which captures the co-aggregation degree of the two species. The fourth one is allocated to the concentration
                                            field c. The solution of the global system yields the updated value of the field variables, with the assumption that
                                            the previous values (φ1n−1,φ2n−1,α n−1 and c n−1) are known.
                                                In the next section, several numerical examples are presented to see the applicability of the numerical tool.
                                            The post-processing and visualization of the results were conducted in Paraview.

                                            Numerical and experimental test cases. For the numerical simulations, all geometrical data as well as
                                            material parameters are summarized in Table 1. the temporal unit (denoted by “Time” in the table) is nondimen-
                                            sionalized using growth characteristic time scale which is in the order of a few hours, see Fig. 3. It means that,
                                            from a numerical point of view, “Time” varies between 0 and 1.

                                            Approval for human/animal experiments. This article does not contain any studies with animals per-
                                            formed by any of the authors. The humans were involved in terms of collecting dental peri-implant bacterial
                                            samples. The collection of clinical samples was authorized by the ethics committee of Hannover Medical School
                                            (No. 9477) in accordance with the principle of anonymity. Furthermore, informed consent was obtained from
                                            all the participants.

                                            Test case 1: single colony, single species. In the first example, different patterns of growth are studied.
                                            A single tiny colony is assumed to be located at the center of the domain. The initial nutrient distribution is
                                            uniform and constant. The numerical investigation shows that the ratio between the nutrient and biofilm dif-
                                            fusivity (r= D
                                                         Db ) plays an important role in the morphology of the grown biofilm. Hereafter, two distinct cases are
                                                          n

                                            investigated. It is assumed that the entire domain is enriched by a uniform initial nutrient. There is no external
                                            provision of the nutrient. Hence, the nutrient can only be consumed. To validate the reliability of the mathemati-
                                            cal model, experimental observations are also conducted.

                                            Experimental setting: bacterial cells and culture conditions. The experimental results are depicted in Fig. 3. The
                                            bacterial strains used were Eikenella corrodens strain SPS_010, Streptococcus Gordonii strains SPS_017 and
                                            SPS_886 (both isolated from the same case of severe peri-implantitis), as Candida albicans strains SPS_888 (=
                                            ATCC 10231, DSM 1386, NIH 3147) and SPS_889 (= ATCC 90028, DSM 11225, NCCLS 11), as well as oral
                                            fungal isolate strain SPS_887 from human peri-implantitis. Bacteria were cultured on Fastidious Anaerobe Agar
                                            (LabM) supplemented with 5% sheep blood. Fungal strains were cultured on Czapek Dox Agar (Sigma-Aldrich).
                                            Bacterial colonies were used to inoculate Todd-Hewitt Broth supplemented with 0.3% Yeast extract, THBY for
                                            short, (Oxoid CM0189) and liquid culture was incubated for 24 h at 37 ◦ C in the atmosphere with 5% CO2.

                                            Simulation: diffusion‑limited growth (dendritic patterns). If rD is relatively small, the biofilm tends to branch
                                            and form a dendritic shape. This is referred to as diffusion-limited growth in the literature. The formation of a
                                            finger-like structure, from a mathematical point of view, is rooted in the fluctuation-induced interface instabil-
                                            ity, ­see39. Such patterns are also observed in other phenomena such as multiphase fl   ­ ows40 and solidification
                                                      41
                                            ­process . The formation of all irregular morphology with lobate margins can be explained in the context of
                                            nutrient absorption. It means that as a result of the scarcity of nutrient flux due to low diffusion through the
                                            biofilm, the bacteria increase the absorption surface via forming lobes. One can see that the nutrient is predomi-
                                            nantly consumed at the locations where the biofilm exists and the far-field is not influenced by the growth. This
                                            is due to relatively low nutrient diffusivity that can not compensate for the consumed material. Looking at the

                                             Description                                 Parameter   Value       unit
                                             Nutrient diffusivity                        Dn          10−6        µm2 Time−1
                                             Bacterial density threshold                 φcri        0.1         µg µm−3
                                             Consumption rate                            Rc          50          µm3 µg−1 Time−1
                                             Co-aggregation coef.                        Rα          15          µm Time−1
                                             Co-aggregation coef.                        τ           1           –
                                             First species growth coef.                  Rs1         500         µm3 µg−1 Time−1
                                             Second species growth coef.                 Rs2         500         µm3 µg−1 Time−1
                                             Phase-field coefficient for α               M           10−4        Time−1
                                             Phase-field coefficient for φ1 , φ2 and c   M           0           Time−1
                                             Phase-field coefficient (diffusivity)       ε2 (Db )    10−8        µm2 Time−1
                                             2D Computational domain size                            100 × 100   µm
                                             Mesh size                                               0.5         µm

                                            Table 1.  Model parameters.



          Scientific Reports |   (2023) 13:11839 |                      https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-38806-2                                            6

Vol:.(1234567890)
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                  Figure 3.  Two different patterns for development of biofilms. (a) Phase-contrast micrographs of colony
                                  morphology for Streptococcus Gordonii strain SPS_885. The colony is generally circular and compact. A slightly
                                  undulate colony margin was observed at later time points. (b) Colony morphologies of Candida albicans strains
                                  SPS_888 and SPS_889. Colonies are rhizoid (branched and dendritic pattern) with irregular cores. Merging of
                                  colonies was observed for strain SPS_889 at later time points. Scale bars, 100 µm.


                                  pattern of nutrient consumption, one can realize that the nutrient is only depleted at the regions where biofilm
                                  exists. Figure 4 shows the numerical simulation of this scenario that is in qualitatively good agreement with the
                                  experimental observations reflected in Fig. 3 part b.

                                  Simulation: diffusion‑unlimited growth (compact pattern). If the diffusion of the nutrient is fast, the biofilm
                                  grows in a compact and spherical fashion, see Fig. 5. Unlike the previous example, the fast diffusion of nutrients
                                  ensures optimal supplies for the bacteria. Hence, the overall shape of the bacterial colony remains circular with
                                  entire margins. Here, due to the high diffusivity, the nutrient is transported from the whole domain to the bio-
                                  film-colonized regions. This leads to the gradual depletion of the nutrient in the whole domain, unlike the previ-
                                  ous case. Experimental investigations also comply qualitatively with the mathematical model, see Fig. 3 part a.

                                  Test case 2: multiple colonies, two species, with interaction (co‑aggregation).                   Experiments:
                                  sample preparation for co‑aggregation and biofilm formation. The bacteria were transferred to a co-aggregation
                                  buffer (1 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM CaCl2, 0.1 mM MgCl2) and the optical density at 600 nm was set to


Scientific Reports |   (2023) 13:11839 |               https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-38806-2                                                 7

                                                                                                                                             Vol.:(0123456789)
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                            Figure 4.  Diffusion-limited growth for rD = 102 (dendritic pattern) in the course of the time, from top to
                                            bottom.



                                            1.0. That is equal to a cell density of about 109 cells per ml. The co-culture inoculum was generated by mixing
                                            the same volumes of two species and resulted in the formation of co-aggregates. Monoculture and co-culture
                                            inocula were vortexed for 10 seconds, diluted ten times in co-aggregation buffer followed by mixing again. Then
                                            3 ml of suspension was placed in 6-well plates (Thermo Fischer Greiner Bio-one Polystyrene 6-well Multiplates)
                                            and allowed to coat for 1 hour. Following this, the non-attached bacteria were removed from the wells and 3 ml
                                            of THBY medium was added. The bacteria were allowed to grow for 8 hours from this time point. After 8 hours
                                            of growth biofilms were stained with the LIVE/DEAD BacLight Bacterial Viability Kit (Invitrogen); rinsed, fixed
                                            in 2.5% glutaraldehyde solution in phosphate-buffered saline, and examined using CLSM (Leica TCS SP2, Leica
                                            Microsystems, Mannheim, Germany). For the imaging purpose, 488 nm laser was used with an emission range
                                            of 500 - 545 nm for SYTO9 and 590 - 680 nm for propidium iodide (PI). For the biofilm in each well, five repre-
                                            sentative images were acquired with optical sections of 3 µm. The Imaris Cell Imaging Software package (Imaris
                                            x64, 6.2.1, Bitplane AG, Zürich, Switzerland) was used to analyze images. A three-dimensional reconstruction
                                            smart view was generated, with green (SYTO9), red (PI) and yellow (co-localized SYTO9 and PI) fractions.
                                            Non-permeable cells were stained in green. Yellow and red signals were considered to represent permeable cells


          Scientific Reports |   (2023) 13:11839 |              https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-38806-2                                                8

Vol:.(1234567890)
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                  Figure 5.  Diffusion-unlimited growth for rD = 106 (compact pattern) in the course of the time, from top to
                                  bottom.



                                  since PI penetrated the membrane of these cells. The experiment was performed twice. Each time for each group
                                  a total of two wells and ten images were generated. The experimental observations are illustrated in Fig. 6.

                                  Simulation. In this test case, unlike test case 1, multiple colonies of two species are considered. The co-aggre-
                                  gation mechanism also exists and contributes to growth boosting. In order to replicate numerically the experi-
                                  mental observations shown in Fig. 6, the entire computational domain is randomly filled with initial colonies of
                                  both species in a uniform way. Then, we let the system evolve in time. The formation of the bacterial cluster in
                                  the regions with high proximity of the two species is observed as a result of co-aggregation.
                                      Figures 7 and 8 show snapshots of both species being represented by tiny colonies with different colors (gray
                                  and cyan represent species 1 and species 2, respectively). Additionally, the regions where co-aggregation has taken
                                  place are pictured using the red rods. These two figures show the development of the colonies over the course of
                                  time for two different conditions discussed in the previous example, namely diffusion-limited and -unlimited


Scientific Reports |   (2023) 13:11839 |               https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-38806-2                                                  9

                                                                                                                                              Vol.:(0123456789)
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                            Figure 6.  Co-aggregates and biofilms. a–c Low magnification phase-contrast micrographs of cell suspensions
                                            with a magnified subsection showing bacterial cells. From left: Streptococcus gordonii strain SPS_017, S.
                                            gordonii strain SPS_017 mixed with Eikenella corrodens strain SPS_010, and E. corrodens strain SPS_010. Both
                                            strains originate from the same severe case of peri-implant disease. After 24 h of incubation large co-aggregates
                                            were observed in the mixture but not in monospecies suspensions. Image fragments at high magnification
                                            are included in the top left corners. d–e Confocal micrographs of 8-h biofilms representing monoculture or
                                            co-culture biofilms are shown in the same order as in a–c. Bigger aggregates were observed in mixed-biofilms
                                            compared to monospecies biofilms. Scale bars, 4 µm (a–c, small bar), 10 µm (a-c, large bar), and 15 µm (d–e).



                                            growth. Similar to the previous test case, the appearance of the dendritic structure is the result of a diffusion-
                                            limited scenario (small rD), while round and compact islands of colonies are a sign of diffusion-unlimited growth.
                                            These figures also demonstrate the nutrient distribution in the course of time. One can see that the nutrient
                                            consumption map is significantly different in the two cases. All in all, the numerical predictions show plausible
                                            qualitative compliance with the experimental observations.
                                                The average nutrient consumption is reflected in Fig. 9. While the nutrient concentration drops gradually in
                                            the diffusion-limited case, it is rapidly depleted in the diffusion-unlimited condition. In both cases, the profile
                                            of the average nutrient is monotonically decreasing because the uniform initial concentration is only consumed
                                            by the biofilm. It is also reflected in the average density of the biofilm that monotonically increases in both cases,
                                            however with different rates.

                                            Test case 3: growth under the directional provision of nutrient with/without reciprocal interac‑
                                            tion (co‑aggregation). This example is identical to the previous one with the difference that the nutrient is
                                            supplied constantly from a particular location (the top side, here). It leads to a prescribed gradient profile of the
                                            nutrient and consequently a preferred direction of colony expansion. To quantify the growth process, one can
                                            look at the average density of the biomass produced in time. It reflects how the available empty space is occupied
                                            by the two-species biofilm.
                                               The experimental setup for such a test case is interesting and quite elaborate because the continuous and
                                            purely diffusion-driven feed of an aqueous environment from a specific location (one side) needs special care and
                                            measures. Any perturbation in the solution fluid can result in convective movement and mixing phenomenon
                                            which destroys the intended gradient in the nutrient availability. Unlike the experimental setting, the numerical
                                            modeling of the problem is free of such practical complications. One needs to apply the desired boundary condi-
                                            tion on the intended regions. Hence, the experimental investigation is ruled out for this test case.
                                               The numerical simulation shows how the nutrient gradient affects the growth pattern of the biofilm. In fact,
                                            the final morphology is a result of both co-aggregation and nutrient availability. The biological activity of the
                                            bacteria is intensified according to the availability of co-aggregation partners as well as nutrient. Figs. 11 and 12
                                            demonstrate snapshots of bacterial development in a dual-species system. The regions in which both species are
                                            coexistent are the dominant sites of bacterial growth which contribute to transforming tiny colonies into larger


          Scientific Reports |   (2023) 13:11839 |               https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-38806-2                                                    10

Vol:.(1234567890)
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                  Figure 7.  Diffusion-limited growth for rD = 102 in the course of the time, from top to bottom (see
                                  Supplementary Video 1).



                                  structured clusters of bacteria (biofilm). The clusters tend to form in the regions with high amounts of nutrients,
                                  namely the regions in the proximity of feeding sites at the top. Apart from nutrient feed, comparing Figs. 11 and
                                  12 reveals how substantially the co-aggregation contributes to the rapid biofilm development.
                                      In Fig. 10, the profile of the average nutrient and biofilm density is plotted with respect to the time. Due to
                                  the continuous provision of the nutrient and tiny initial colonies, the average value of the nutrient concentra-
                                  tion increases first (primary ascending phase) and then decreases to a steady state constant value (secondary
                                  descending phase). The steady-state condition is reached when the rate of nutrient feeding is balanced with
                                  the rate of nutrient consumption when sufficient biofilm is developed. In the absence of co-aggregation, the
                                  development of biofilm, which determines the consumption capacity, is significantly slower. Consequently, the



Scientific Reports |   (2023) 13:11839 |               https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-38806-2                                                 11

                                                                                                                                              Vol.:(0123456789)
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                            Figure 8.  Diffusion-unlimited growth for rD = 106 in the course of the time, from top to bottom (see
                                            Supplementary Video 2).



                                            nutrient feed outweighs the nutrient consumption leading to an increase in the average nutrient and a delayed
                                            succeeding decrease.

                                            Conclusion
                                            A novel mathematical model based on the phase-field method is proposed for the simulation of multi-species
                                            biofilms. The co-aggregation of the species is taken into account in a system of multi-species colonies. The com-
                                            plex morphology of multi-species colonies observed in the experiments can be reproduced using the presented
                                            mathematical model. The formation of such complex structures is driven, on one hand, by “nutrient availability”
                                            and, on the other hand, by “species proximity”. Since the proposed model is based on the phase-field approach,
                                            one does not need to track the moving interfaces of the multi-species and multi-colony biofilms. Handling mul-
                                            tiple and moving boundaries is the main superiority of phase-field modeling in this application. Additionally,



          Scientific Reports |   (2023) 13:11839 |              https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-38806-2                                                12

Vol:.(1234567890)
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                  Figure 9.  Multispecies biofilm growth under different nutrient diffusivity.




                                  Figure 10.  Multispecies biofilm growth under the directional nutrient provision for rD = 106.

                                  the merging of multiple colonies is treated naturally. It turns out that phase-field modeling is a successful and
                                  applicable approach for this biological problem at hand.
                                      The nature of biofilm and the underlying processes are so complex that probably four continuous isotropic
                                  scalar variables ( φ1 , φ2 , c and α) are not sufficient to capture the real bacterial morphology to a good extent.
                                  This is why quantitative validation of the numerical results against the experimental observations in this work
                                  is a challenging task. Nevertheless, mathematical modeling, despite simplifications, can help us to understand
                                  the “fundamental underlying mechanisms” that are involved.
                                      This work can be extended and improved in several directions. A system composed of more than two spe-
                                  cies is of great interest and can be modeled just by adding phase-field equations. Furthermore, the interaction
                                  between the species can be generalized to not only reciprocal dual interaction but also to multilateral metabolic
                                  communications. Incorporating anisotropic growth function can also enhance the model. Finally, an efficient
                                  parallelized numerical architecture (such as MPI) can be employed to solve the model in 3D. These extensions
                                  are left for future work.




Scientific Reports |   (2023) 13:11839 |               https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-38806-2                                                 13

                                                                                                                                              Vol.:(0123456789)
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                            Figure 11.  Directional nutrient feeding from the top side in the presence of co-aggregation for rD = 106 in the
                                            course of the time, from top to bottom (see Supplementary Video 3).




          Scientific Reports |   (2023) 13:11839 |              https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-38806-2                                                14

Vol:.(1234567890)
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                  Figure 12.  Directional nutrient feeding in the absence of co-aggregation for rD = 106 in the course of the time,
                                  from top to bottom.




Scientific Reports |   (2023) 13:11839 |              https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-38806-2                                                 15

                                                                                                                                             Vol.:(0123456789)
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                            Data availability
                                            Raw data (both numerical and experimental results) are available from the corresponding author on request.
                                            Furthermore, it is deposited into the Leibniz University public repository.

                                            Code availability
                                            The developed FORTRAN file of the utilized ANSYS user element is available from the corresponding author
                                            on request. Furthermore, it is deposited into the Leibniz University public repository.

                                            Received: 20 February 2023; Accepted: 14 July 2023


                                            References
                                             1. Kolenbrander, P. E., Palmer, R. J., Periasamy, S. & Jakubovics, N. S. Oral multispecies biofilm development and the key role of
                                                cell–cell distance. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 8(7), 471–480 (2010).
                                             2. Kolenbrander, P. E. et al. Bacterial interactions and successions during plaque development. Periodontology 2000 42(1), 47–79
                                                (2006).
                                             3. Mutha, N. V. R. et al. Transcriptional profiling of coaggregation interactions between Streptococcus gordonii and Veillonella parvula
                                                by dual RNA-seq. Sci. Rep. 9(1), 7664 (2019).
                                             4. Palmer, R. J. et al. Interbacterial adhesion networks within early oral biofilms of single human hosts. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
                                                83(11), e00407-17 (2017).
                                             5. Ding, A. M., Palmer, R. J., Cisar, J. O. & Kolenbrander, P. E. Shear-enhanced oral microbial adhesion. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
                                                76(4), 1294–1297 (2010).
                                             6. Zhou, P., Liu, J., Merritt, J. & Qi, F. A YadA-like autotransporter, hag1 in Veillonella atypica is a multivalent hemagglutinin involved
                                                in adherence to oral streptococci, Porphyromonas gingivalis, and human oral buccal cells. Mol. Oral Microbiol. 30(4), 269–279
                                                (2015).
                                             7. Egland, P. G., Palmer, R. J. & Kolenbrander, P. E. Interspecies communication in Streptococcus gordonii–Veillonella atypica biofilms:
                                                Signaling in flow conditions requires juxtaposition. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 101(48), 16917–16922 (2004).
                                             8. Kolenbrander, P. E. Multispecies communities: Interspecies interactions influence growth on saliva as sole nutritional source. Int.
                                                J. Oral Sci. 3(2), 49–54 (2011).
                                             9. Wu, C. et al. Genetic and molecular determinants of polymicrobial interactions in Fusobacterium nucleatum. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
                                                118(23), e2006482118 (2021).
                                            10. Simon-Soro, A. et al. Polymicrobial aggregates in human saliva build the oral biofilm. mBio 13(1), e00131-22 (2022).
                                            11. Kolenbrander, P. E. Oral microbial communities: Biofilms, interactions, and genetic systems. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 54(1), 413–437
                                                (2000).
                                            12. Li, Q. et al. Oral pathogen Fusobacterium nucleatum coaggregates with Pseudomonas aeruginosa to modulate the inflammatory
                                                cytotoxicity of pulmonary epithelial cells. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 11, 643913 (2021).
                                            13. Lima, B. P., Hu, L. I., Vreeman, G. W., Weibel, D. B. & Lux, R. The oral bacterium Fusobacterium nucleatum binds Staphylococcus
                                                aureus and alters expression of the staphylococcal accessory regulator sarA. Microb. Ecol. 78(2), 336–347 (2018).
                                            14. Lang, C. et al. Specific lactobacillus/mutans streptococcus co-aggregation. J. Dent. Res. 89(2), 175–179 (2009).
                                            15. Lardon, L. A. et al. iDynoMiCS: Next-generation individual-based modelling of biofilms. Environ. Microbiol. 13(9), 2416–2434
                                                (2011).
                                            16. Naylor, J. et al. Simbiotics: A multiscale integrative platform for 3D modeling of bacterial populations. ACS Synth. Biol. 6(7),
                                                1194–1210 (2017).
                                            17. Li, B. et al. NUFEB: A massively parallel simulator for individual-based modelling of microbial communities. PLoS Comput. Biol.
                                                15(12), e1007125 (2019).
                                            18. Tack, I. L. M. M., Nimmegeers, P., Akkermans, S., Hashem, I. & Impe, J. F. M. V. Simulation of Escherichia coli dynamics in biofilms
                                                and submerged colonies with an individual-based model including metabolic network information. Front. Microbiol. 8, 2509 (2017).
                                            19. Verhulst, A., Cappuyns, A., Derlinden, E. V., Bernaerts, K. & Impe, J. V. Analysis of the lag phase to exponential growth transition
                                                by incorporating inoculum characteristics. Food Microbiol. 28(4), 656–666 (2011).
                                            20. Alpkvista, E. & Klapper, I. A multidimensional multispecies continuum model for heterogeneous biofilm development. Bull. Math.
                                                Biol. 69(2), 765–789 (2007).
                                            21. Albero, A. B., Ehret, A. E. & Böl, M. A new approach to the simulation of microbial biofilms by a theory of fluid-like pressure-
                                                restricted finite growth. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 272, 271–289 (2014).
                                            22. Soleimani, M. Finite strain visco-elastic growth driven by nutrient diffusion: Theory, FEM implementation and an application to
                                                the biofilm growth. Comput. Mech. 64(5), 1289–1301 (2019).
                                            23. Jana, S. et al. Nonlinear rheological characteristics of single species bacterial biofilms. npj Biofilms Microbiomes 6(1), 19 (2020).
                                            24. Helmlinger, G., Netti, P. A., Lichtenbeld, H. C., Melder, R. J. & Jain, R. K. Solid stress inhibits the growth of multicellular tumor
                                                spheroids. Nat. Biotechnol. 15(8), 778–783 (1997).
                                            25. Cyron, C. J., Wilson, J. S. & Humphrey, J. D. Mechanobiological stability: A new paradigm to understand the enlargement of
                                                aneurysms?. J. R. Soc. Interface 11(100), 20140680 (2014).
                                            26. Golding, I., Kozlovsky, Y., Cohen, I. & Ben-Jacob, E. Studies of bacterial branching growth using reaction–diffusion models for
                                                colonial development. Physica A 260(3–4), 510–554 (1998).
                                            27. Shen, Y. et al. Experimental and theoretical investigation of multispecies oral biofilm resistance to chlorhexidine treatment. Sci.
                                                Rep. 6(1), 27537 (2016).
                                            28. Stewart, P. S. et al. Reaction-diffusion theory explains hypoxia and heterogeneous growth within microbial biofilms associated
                                                with chronic infections. npj Biofilms Microbiomes 2(1), 1–8 (2016).
                                            29. Wood, B. D. & Whitaker, S. Diffusion and reaction in biofilms. Chem. Eng. Sci. 53(3), 397–425 (1998).
                                            30. Wood, B. D. & Whitaker, S. Multi-species diffusion and reaction in biofilms and cellular media. Chem. Eng. Sci. 55(17), 3397–3418
                                                (2000).
                                            31. Fisher, R. A. The wave of advance of advantageous genes. Annals Eugenics 7(4), 355–369 (1937).
                                            32. Kot, M. Elements of Mathematical Ecology (Cambridge University Press, 2001).
                                            33. Rickard, A. H., Gilbert, P., High, N. J., Kolenbrander, P. E. & Handley, P. S. Bacterial coaggregation: An integral process in the
                                                development of multi-species biofilms. Trends Microbiol. 11(2), 94–100 (2003).
                                            34. Cuny, L. et al. Evaluation of productive biofilms for continuous lactic acid production. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 116(10), 2687–2697
                                                (2019).
                                            35. Feng, G. et al. Bacterial attachment and biofilm formation on surfaces are reduced by small-diameter nanoscale pores: How small
                                                is small enough?. npj Biofilms Microbiomes 1(1), 1–9 (2015).




          Scientific Reports |   (2023) 13:11839 |                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-38806-2                                                                      16

Vol:.(1234567890)
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  36. Allen, S. M. & Cahn, J. W. A microscopic theory for antiphase boundary motion and its application to antiphase domain coarsen-
                                      ing. Acta Metall. 27(6), 1085–1095 (1979).
                                  37. Steinbach, I. & Salama, H. Lectures on Phase Field. Springer Nature Switzerland, (2023).
                                  38. Korelc, J. & Wriggers, P. Automation of Finite Element Methods (Springer International Publishing, 2016).
                                  39. Kessler, D. A. & Levine, H. Fluctuation-induced diffusive instabilities. Nature 394(6693), 556–558 (1998).
                                  40. Saffman, P. G. Viscous fingering in Hele–Shaw cells. J. Fluid Mech. 173, 73–94 (1986).
                                  41. Kupferman, R., Shochet, O. & Ben-Jacob, E. Numerical study of a morphology diagram in the large undercooling limit using a
                                      phase-field model. Phys. Rev. E 50(2), 1005–1008 (1994).

                                  Acknowledgements
                                  This project was funded by the German Foundation of Research (DFG) within the framework of the SIIRI project
                                  under TRR298 (Project no. 426335750) in subproject B07. The authors acknowledge this support.

                                  Author contributions
                                  M.S.: Conceptualization, mathematical theory development, implementation of user-element in the FEM soft-
                                  ware, original draft preparation. S.P.S.: Conceptualization of the experiments, designing the experimental assays,
                                  draft preparation for experimental parts. T.Q.: Performing the series of coaggregation experiments. R.M.: Per-
                                  forming the series of single and multi colonies experiments. M.S.: Scientific supervision of experimental part,
                                  revising the manuscript. P.W.: Scientific supervision of mathematical as well as numerical model, reviewing the
                                  manuscript. P.J.: Scientific supervision of the whole SIIRI B07 project, reviewing.

                                  Funding
                                  Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.

                                  Competing interests
                                  The authors declare no competing interests.

                                  Additional information
                                  Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://​doi.​org/​
                                  10.​1038/​s41598-​023-​38806-2.
                                  Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.S.
                                  Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
                                  Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
                                  institutional affiliations.
                                                Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
                                                License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
                                  format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
                                  Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
                                  article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
                                  material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
                                  permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
                                  the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.

                                  © The Author(s) 2023




Scientific Reports |   (2023) 13:11839 |                 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-38806-2                                                              17

                                                                                                                                                            Vol.:(0123456789)
