                                               Finite Elements in Analysis and Design 255 (2026) 104489


                                                        Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                           Finite Elements in Analysis & Design
                                                journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finel




A fast and robust third medium contact approach using the
neighbored element method
                                  ∗
Max von Zabiensky                  , Dustin R. Jantos , Philipp Junker
Leibniz University Hannover, Institute of Continuum Mechanics, Hannover, Germany



ARTICLE               INFO                            ABSTRACT

Keywords:                                             In several engineering applications, self-contact is a major effect or even desired feature,
Friction-less contact                                 e.g., energy absorption in severe structural deformations, gripper in (soft-)robotics, and the
Finite deformations                                   optimization of those. Usual contact approaches require extensive calculation effort, but a fast
Finite element method
                                                      and robust simulation approach could lead to remarkable improvements in product design.
Neighbored element method
                                                      The third medium contact is a very promising approach, which can fulfill the requirements
Hyperelasticity
                                                      mentioned above. This method was also already applied in topology optimization approaches.
                                                      However, the most concurrent regularization approaches require at least quadratic shape
                                                      functions for hexahedron finite elements and at least cubic shape functions for tetrahedrons.
                                                      In recent works, a new regularization technique was developed: herein, the gradients of
                                                      deformation measures are computed by additional nodal degrees of freedom in the finite
                                                      elements, i.e., as additional fields of unknowns. This is accompanied by a reduction of the order
                                                      of the shape function. In this work, we derive a special discretization of the additional unknowns
                                                      which enables self-contact based on the neighbored element method. This approach leads to a
                                                      fast algorithm for the computation of the regularized set of partial differential equations: the
                                                      displacements are the only nodal degrees of freedom and can be computed with linear finite
                                                      element shape functions while the additional unknowns are discretized in the quadrature points
                                                      of the mesh and solved in a staggered manner. The results are critically analyzed and illustrated
                                                      for several two-dimensional problems.




1. Introduction

    The modeling of contact mechanics goes a long way in the field of finite element methods, since the very first formulation in [1].
Until today, the applications of advanced contact formulations attain significant importance in the real world, see [2]. Based on the
applied contact method, the complexity of the numerical treatment may vary strongly. The simulation of a contact problem goes
along with local and global search algorithms, i.e., [3,4], as well as a specific handling of variational inequalities, due to the nature
of the formulation of these problems, i.e., [5,6]. One possible way to reduce the computation effort for the detection of potential
contact zones is to preassign the contact regions, like node-to-node contact, node-to-segment contact, or the mortar method. For
more details and an overview on these methods, interested readers are referred to [7,8]. To handle the arising inequalities, many
formulations where investigated over decades, like penalty method, barrier functions, or augmented Lagrangian techniques. For
further details, see [7,9,10]. In [11], these approaches have also been extended to finite deformations. Even a meshfree approach,
based on a combination of the third medium contact with the isogeometric meshfree coupling, was developed in [12]. One famous
contact formulation for large deformations is developed in [13], whereby the contact area is discretized by nodes and segments.


  ∗ Corresponding author.
     E-mail address: von-zabiensky@ikm.uni-hannover.de (M. von Zabiensky).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.finel.2025.104489
Received 31 July 2025; Received in revised form 3 November 2025; Accepted 26 November 2025
Available online 26 January 2026
0168-874X/© 2026 The Authors.          Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                     Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489

The connection between these nodes and segments is based on a master–slave condition and is applied by a single pass algorithm.
This approach was further developed by [14,15], which introduced a two-pass algorithm to fulfill the 2D contact patch test. Several
developments followed this idea and applied further discretization approaches. Many of them refer to the mortar method, which
originated from the field of domain decomposition methods, see [16–18]. The idea of the domain decomposition was extended
in [19], by defining patches between the contact segments, which results from a triangulation of the intermediate domain. Within the
patches the authors embedded a displacement field of the same order as the contacting bodies. Therewith, the Lagrange multipliers
and strain-like measurements are defined along the whole domain, rather on the contact segments only. Founding on this approach
in [19], the authors enabled the computation of various contact problems, shown in their following work [20,21].
    Out of these approaches there is one rather simple scheme, which was first introduced in [22], where anisotropic modeling
was used in the contact area to avoid inequality constraints. This so called third medium contact method (TMC) is based on the
idea, that the contact is implemented by a filling mesh between the solid bodies, i.e., discretizing void regions between potential
contact faces. It is worth mention that the TMC method and the contact domain method in [19] seem to share significant similarities
since both introduce a finite discretization for the intermediate domain by numerical elements, respectively patches. However, it
must be emphasized that there is a major difference due to discretization: in case of the contact domain method, the contact area
is pre-described on each body and than connected with a single layer of triangulated patches. In contrast, in the TMC method,
a volumetric mesh is applied between potential contact areas which allow for more regular meshes even for very large initial
gaps potentially improving numerical accuracy and stability due to improved mesh quality. In addition, meshing of the overall
problem can be achieved by usual meshing algorithms by assuming the ‘‘void’’ simply to be a second material phase. Thus, it is not
necessary to explicitly pre-describe discretized contact points and/or faces, but instead to stabilize highly deformed elements. This
can be achieved with an additional regularization without introducing a residual stiffness for void elements except for the case of
contact. This approach was further refined over the last years, see [23–27], whereby the regularization is applied to the gradient
of the deformation gradient. With these higher gradients, higher deformation modes are included in the theory, and in turn also
higher-order shape functions within the finite element formulation. An alternative stabilization was achieved in [25], whereby
the Laplacian of the deformation field was taken into account. As a result, a snap-though problem could be simulated. Further
regularization approaches were developed: in [28], the polar decomposition of the deformation gradient is used to regularize the
modeling of pneumatic structures. Moreover, the TMC was used to optimize non-linear thermo-mechanical problems in [29]. Last
but not least, a friction model was presented in [26], where the TMC follows the crystal plasticity theory.
    These mentioned applications established the TMC in stabilizing finite element simulations with contact and yet, there is more
potential. Especially in the field of optimization problems [30], or (soft) robotics [31], is a remarkable need for a stabilization of
void phases and enabling the simulation of effects like (self-)contact, snapping, or buckling, while the computational costs stay
moderate. A most recent improvement of the method is given in [32], wherein the regularization of the third medium is based
on the gradient of the rotation part of the deformation gradient as well as the Jacobian, i.e., volumetric deformation. Therefore, a
reduced, but very robust implementation was developed, which only takes the relevant modes of the gradient of the deformation
gradient into account. Further, it was proven that a reduced formulation with finite elements with linear shape functions which are a
basic concept of the finite discretizations [33], can be applied. However, additional field variables have to be introduced, which are
treated as additional nodal degrees of freedom. Furthermore, this approach was applied to 3D problems [34] and a stabilization-free
virtual element method for 2D problems [35].
    In this work, we pick up on the reformulation of the regularization from [32] to provide a contact simulation in which the
additional field values of the regularization are solved in a special numerical scheme: we apply the neighbored element method
(NEM) which is a staggered approach solving the additional degrees of freedom via a (meshfree) finite difference scheme while
the displacements are the only nodal degrees of freedom in the finite element approach. In this work, we discretize the partial
differential equations regarding the regularization within the quadrature points of the finite element mesh used to compute the
displacement field. As a consequence, a remarkable reduction of the computation time can be achieved, likewise to the work
of [36], while achieving maximum spatial resolution for the additional field variables. All examples in this paper will be solved
with linear, i.e., first order, shape functions which results in a fast and efficient computation of the TMC. With numerical examples
and benchmark problems, it will be illustrated how the new solving approach effects the interaction of the solid and void phases.
    The paper is structured as follows: in Section 2 the variational formulation for the TMC is explained. In Section 3 the novel
numerical approach via NEM is explained and numerical results are given in Section 4.


2. Methodology

2.1. Preliminaries

    For the formulation of the TMC, it is necessary to define a medium as an infill between potential contact zones of the solid
regions, which we refer to as void phase. This void medium has to be highly compliant, but as soon as the solid phases are about
to get into contact, it has to get stiffer to act like a barrier and to enable contact forces. Of course, the stiffness of this void phase
has to be effective enough to prevent penetration and provide a small as possible gap in case of contact, but should also be as
compliant as possible prior to contact to not impair contact free deformations. Beside this compromise, it should be noted that
strongly compressed or distorted void elements should not affect the stability of the numerical treatment.

                                                                    2
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                       Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489

2.2. Continuum model

    The kinematic relations have to be formulated first based on the initial configuration. Regarding to the mapping between the
initial and current configuration, we define the deformation gradient 𝐅 based on the gradient of the deformation field ∇𝐮. From
this, the Cauchy–Green deformation tensor 𝐂, as well as the Green–Lagrange deformation tensor 𝐄 can be derived:
                                      1( T       )
        𝐅 = 𝐈 + ∇𝐮                𝐄=     𝐅 𝐅−𝐈                  𝐂 = 2𝐄 + 𝐈 .                                                    (1)
                                      2
    Detailed derivations can be found in [37,38]. To simulate finite deformations of the solid phase, the strain energy is used
analogously to [32], which is adapted here to the two-dimensional case. This formulation describes a hyperelastic material behavior
with a split in volumetric and deviatoric terms:
                  𝐾               𝜇
        𝛹M (𝐂) =       [ln(𝐽 )]2 + (𝐽 −1 tr(𝐂) − 2) .                                                                                    (2)
                   2              2
    The engineering parameters which characterize     √ the material behavior are described by the shear modulus 𝜇 and the compression
modulus 𝐾. The Jacobian is given by 𝐽 = det( 𝐂) and the trace of the Cauchy–Green deformation tensor is defined by tr(𝐂). In
general, it is also possible to apply other (inelastic) material models for the solid phase, since the stabilization is integrated only into
the void phase which will be shown later. However, it is clear that the stabilization requires the computation based on the finite
deformation theory. For the formulation of the contact problem, the third medium approach according to [32] is used, introducing
the distortion energy for the two-dimensional case as
                    𝜇 −1
        𝛹V (𝐂) = 𝛾      (𝐽 tr(𝐂) − 2) .                                                                                                  (3)
                     2
    The parameter 𝛾 scales the magnitude of the energy in comparison to the hyperelastic non-void material phase, i.e., the effective
stiffness of void material. It must be chosen small enough so that the solid material does not suffer any influence from the third
medium in non-contact regions. Since the phases of the third medium and the solid material are to be clearly separated in the
undeformed configuration, the parameter 𝜒 is introduced, which indicates the solid material for 𝜒 = 1 and the void material phase
for 𝜒 = 0. The total elastic strain energy for the problem body 𝛺 containing the actual structure and the void regions is thus defined
by

        𝛹 = 𝜒 𝛹M + (1 − 𝜒) 𝛹V    ∀ 𝑿 ∈ 𝛺.                                                                                                      (4)


2.3. Formulation of the regularization

    By defining the strain energy of the third medium, the elastic material behavior of the void phase is specified. However, this
formulation alone is not yet sufficient, since the elements tend to strong distortions at large deformation states, which does not
entail a stable calculation of finite deformations [23]. For this reason, a regularization for the void material (𝜒 = 0) is necessary,
which in this work is based on the regularization of the gradient of the rotational and volumetric part of the deformation gradient,
originally introduced in [32]. Here, only the gradient of the rotational part ∇𝐑 is accounted for. In [32], it has already been shown
that the regularization due to the deformation gradient can be neglected by using linear shape functions.
    The calculation of the rotation can be derived from the polar decomposition of the deformation gradient 𝐅 = 𝐑 ⋅ 𝐔. By converting
this formulation according to the right stretch tensor 𝐔 = 𝐑T ⋅ 𝐅, the rotation angle 𝜑 for the two-dimensional case can be calculated
using the components of the deformation gradient. The symmetry of the right stretch tensor 𝑈12 = 𝑈21 can be utilized yielding
                    [           ]
                      𝐹12 − 𝐹21
        tan(𝜑(𝐅)) =               .                                                                                                (5)
                      𝐹11 + 𝐹22
    Furthermore, it can be shown that the squares of the norms of the gradient of the rotation tensor and the angle of rotation are
equal ‖∇𝐑‖2 = ‖∇𝜑‖2 , cf. [32].
    However, the rotational gradient, or more precisely the angle 𝜑, will not to be regularized directly in the proposed method.
Instead, an additional field variable 𝑝 is introduced, which is subject to regularization and coupled to the rotation angle 𝜑 by means
of a square error minimization. Such kind of regularization approach was already applied in gradient enhanced damage modeling
in [39] and topology optimization [40]. For further details regarding the specific formulation of TMC, we refer to [32].
    For the regularization, the following additional term for the strain energy is introduced:
                 𝛾
        𝛹R (𝐅) = [𝛽𝑝 (tan𝜑(𝐅) − 𝑝)2 + 𝛼𝑝 ‖∇𝑝‖2 ] .                                                                                 (6)
                 2
    The regularization will only be applied in the void phase. The penalty parameters 𝛽𝑝 and 𝛼𝑝 are intended to control the coupling
of the variable 𝑝 to the rotation gradient and the potency of the regularization, respectively. To the end, this will achieve a spatial
smoothing of tan(𝜑(𝐅)).
    Likewise, the regularization for the Jacobian 𝐽 = det(𝐅) will be implemented as a additional term for the strain energy:
                𝛾
        𝛹J (𝐅) = [𝛽𝑞 (𝐽 − 𝑞)2 + 𝛼𝑞 ‖∇𝑞‖2 ] .                                                                                       (7)
                2
    Herein, the penalty parameters 𝛽𝑞 and 𝛼𝑞 are controlling the coupling of the field variable 𝑞 to the gradient of the Jacobian.
Therewith, a spatial smoothing of the volumetric inflation will be achieved. Due to the spatial smoothing, severe distortions are

                                                                     3
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                              Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489

prevented in the void elements which can lead to numerical instabilities. Furthermore, the formulation of the strain energy in
Eqs. (6) and (7) only adding energy to the system, even if the Jacobian 𝐽 , or the rotation tan(𝜑(𝐅)) take negative values. In addition,
the reciprocal Jacobian in Eq. (3) ensures an incompressible martial behavior whereby a self-penetration of the void elements is
prevented.
    In contrast to the solution in [32], the numerical solution of the resulting differential equations for the solution of 𝑝 and 𝑞 will be
completely different in this work and is based on its strong form. The differences of the numerical solution schemes are presented
in detail in Section 3.

2.4. Stationary conditions

    Using the strain energies, see (2), (3), (6) and (7), the Gibbs energy is formulated as
                  [                                           ]
        =         𝜒 𝛹M + (1 − 𝜒) 𝛹V + (1 − 𝜒) 𝛹R + (1 − 𝜒) 𝛹J d𝑉 −        𝐛 ⋅ 𝐮 d𝑉 −         𝐭 ⋅ 𝐮 d𝐴 .                                              (8)
             ∫𝛺                                                       ∫𝛺                ∫𝜕𝛺
   Here, 𝐛 and 𝐭 denote the body forces and the traction forces on the Neumann boundary of the solid material, respectively.
Since the strain energies are split into their respective phases by the parameter 𝜒, they can be related to the entire domain 𝛺. The
governing equations are obtained from the principle of virtual work, i.e.,

         → stat           ⇒           𝛿  = 𝛿𝐮  + 𝛿𝑝  + 𝛿𝑞  = 0            ∀ 𝛿𝐮, 𝛿𝑝, 𝛿𝑞.                                                          (9)

    The stationary condition of the variation of the Gibbs energy according to the displacement 𝐮 reads
                                          (                                                     )
                   𝜕𝛹M                         𝜕𝛹V                𝜕𝛹R               𝜕𝛹J
       𝛿𝐮  = 𝜒        ∶ 𝛿𝐄 d𝑉 + (1 − 𝜒)             ∶ 𝛿𝐄 d𝑉 +        ∶ 𝛿𝐅 d𝑉 +          ∶ 𝛿𝐅 d𝑉 = 0 ∀ 𝛿𝐮 .                                          (10)
                ∫𝛺 𝜕𝐄                       ∫𝛺 𝜕𝐄              ∫𝛺 𝜕𝐅             ∫𝛺 𝜕𝐅
   The variation of the Gibbs energy according to the field variable 𝑝 includes only the regularization part (6) of the strain energy
and yields
                       [                                               ]
      𝛿𝑝  = (1 − 𝜒) 𝛾      −𝛽𝑝 (tan𝜑(𝐅) − 𝑝) 𝛿𝑝 d𝑉 +    𝛼𝑝 ∇𝑝 ⋅ ∇𝛿𝑝 d𝑉 = 0 ∀ 𝛿𝑝.                                                (11)
                         ∫𝛺                           ∫𝛺
    For purpose of numerical discretization via finite difference scheme within the NEM (c.f. Section 3), we reformulate Eq. (11) to
its strong form by applying an integration by parts and Gauss’s integral theorem:
                         [                                                                      ]
        𝛿𝑝  = (1 − 𝜒) 𝛾      −𝛽𝑝 (tan(𝜑(𝐅) − 𝑝)) 𝛿𝑝 d𝑉 +     𝛼𝑝 𝐧 ⋅ ∇𝑝 𝛿𝑝 d𝑉 −    𝛼𝑝 ∇2 𝑝 𝛿𝑝 d𝑉 = 0 ∀ 𝛿𝑝                      (12)
                           ∫𝛺                             ∫𝜕𝛺                   ∫𝛺

with the Laplace operator ∇2 𝑝 ∶= ∇⋅∇𝑝. The gradient ∇𝑝 in Eq. (12) is now only applied on the boundary 𝜕𝛺 and yields homogeneous
Neumann boundary condition. Since the stationary condition has to be fulfilled independently on the boundary 𝜕𝛺 and the inner
domain 𝛺, we find the strong form as

         − 𝛽𝑝 (tan𝜑(𝐅) − 𝑝) − 𝛼𝑝 ∇2 𝑝 = 0                 ∀𝑋∈𝛺                                                                                       (13)
                               𝐧 ⋅ ∇𝑝 = 0                 ∀ 𝑋 ∈ 𝜕𝛺

    The last variation of the Gibbs energy according to the field variable 𝑞 reads
                        [                                        ]
       𝛿𝑞  = (1 − 𝜒) 𝛾     −𝛽𝑞 (𝐽 − 𝑞) 𝛿𝑞 d𝑉 +    𝛼𝑞 ∇𝑞 ⋅ ∇𝛿𝑞 d𝑉 = 0 ∀ 𝛿𝑞 .                                                                         (14)
                         ∫𝛺                     ∫𝛺
   Analogously to the field variable 𝑝, we reformulate Eq. (14) to its strong form, in the same manner as shown for the other field
variable, i.e.,
                        [                                                             ]
       𝛿𝑞  = (1 − 𝜒) 𝛾     −𝛽𝑞 (𝐽 − 𝑞) 𝛿𝑞 d𝑉 +     𝛼𝑞 𝐧 ⋅ ∇𝑞 𝛿𝑞 d𝑉 −    𝛼𝑞 ∇2 𝑞 𝛿𝑞 d𝑉 = 0 ∀ 𝛿𝑞                               (15)
                         ∫𝛺                     ∫𝜕𝛺                   ∫𝛺
and thus,

         − 𝛽𝑞 (𝐽 − 𝑞) − 𝛼𝑞 ∇2 𝑞 = 0                 ∀𝑋∈𝛺                                                                                             (16)
                          𝐧 ⋅ ∇𝑞 = 0                ∀ 𝑋 ∈ 𝜕𝛺.

    The numerical treatment is presented in Section 3.

3. Numerical treatment

3.1. Preliminaries

    Eq. (10) can be evaluated with a classical non-linear Finite Element Method (FEM) applying a Newton–Raphson iteration over
multiple load steps [41]. The displacements are approximated in this work with linear shape functions, i.e., first-order spatial
discretization.

                                                                      4
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                             Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489

    To calculate the field variables 𝑝 and 𝑞, we use the strong form in Eqs. (13) and (16). We apply a generalized Finite Difference
Method (FDM), which requires the neighbored relations of a discretized cloud of points which we choose to be the quadrature points
in each finite element. A detailed description of the implemented FDM will be presented in the next section.
    Overall, the Neighbored Element Method (NEM) combines the FEM and the FDM solution, in a staggered manner, i.e., for
each load step, the displacement field 𝐮 is computed via a converged Newton–Raphson loop with the field variables 𝑝 and 𝑞 kept
constant. Alternating, the field variables are then solved for each load step via a separate (linear) equation system while keeping
the displacements frozen. This approach is in contrast to the solution in [32], in which the equation for 𝑝 as well as 𝑞 in its weak
form was approximated by finite element shape functions and discretized as additional degrees of freedom within the FEM.
    The NEM was already applied in a similar way in [42] based on the works in [43,44]. However, in these works, a transient
partial differential equation was solved via an explicit time discretization, which allowed for a local solution of the according field
variables. In the presented work, the equation for the field variable 𝑝 and 𝑞 in their strong form do not contain any time derivatives
and will be solved directly by means of a (linear) equation system. To directly incorporate the homogeneous Neumann boundary
in said equation system, the point cloud for the FDM has to be divided in inner points in 𝛺void and points on the boundary 𝜕𝛺void
with their according normal surface normal vectors. Thereby, only the void domain has to be identified 𝛺 = 𝛺void ∪ 𝛺solid , where
𝛺void ||𝜒=0 . As mentioned before, we choose the quadrature points of the FEM mesh as inner points for the FDM to circumvent
additional interpolation schemes between the two discretization. As boundary points, we choose the according quadrature point on
the surface elements of the FEM mesh. Both, inner and outer points, are treated slightly different in their respective computation
of the differential operators which will be explained in the two following Sections 3.2 and 3.3. The resulting equation system is
derived in Section 3.4


3.2. Treatment of inner quadrature points


    To approximate spatial differential information on a field variable 𝑣 in a point of interest 𝐱0 = (𝑥0 , 𝑦0 )T ∈ 𝛺void ∖𝜕𝛺void , a Taylor
series from that reference point 𝐱0 with spatial coordinates to neighboring points 𝐱𝑖 ∈ 𝛺void is defined by
                                              [                                                  ]
                      𝜕𝑣 ||       𝜕𝑣 ||      1 𝜕 2 𝑣 ||        𝜕 2 𝑣 ||           𝜕 2 𝑣 ||
        𝑣|𝐱𝑖 = 𝑣|𝐱0 +        𝛥𝑥 +       𝛥𝑦 +            𝛥𝑥 2
                                                             +          𝛥𝑦 2
                                                                             + 2           𝛥𝑥 𝛥𝑦   + (|ℎ|3 )                           (17)
                      𝜕𝑥 ||𝐱0 𝑖 𝜕𝑦 ||𝐱0 𝑖 2 𝜕𝑥2 ||𝐱0 𝑖         𝜕𝑦2 ||𝐱0 𝑖        𝜕𝑥𝜕𝑦 ||𝐱0 𝑖 𝑖

with the spatial increments
       [ ]
        𝛥𝑥𝑖
             = 𝐱𝑖 − 𝐱0 .                                                                                                                            (18)
        𝛥𝑦𝑖

   For the computation of the Laplacian, the second unmixed spatial derivatives at a point of interest have to be computed,
     𝜕 2 𝑣 ||         2 |
i.e.,𝜕𝑥2 ||
                and 𝜕𝜕𝑦𝑣2 || . At least five neighboring points are required to solve Eq. (17), as all first and second derivatives are assumed
             𝐱0            |𝐱0
as unknowns. By applying a Taylor-series to a total number of 𝑛 neighbors, a equation system in the form

                                                                          ⎡𝑣,𝑥𝑥 ⎤
        ⎡ 1 𝛥𝑥2 1 𝛥𝑦2 𝛥𝑥2 𝛥𝑦2 𝛥𝑥                                 𝛥𝑦     ⎤ ⎢ 𝑣 ⎥ ⎡𝑣 − 𝑣 ⎤
                                                         1            1
        ⎢2 1 2 1                         1  1                           ⎥ ⎢ ,𝑦𝑦 ⎥    1    0
        ⎢ ⋮                ⋮             ⋮            ⋮            ⋮ ⎥ ⋅ ⎢𝑣,𝑥𝑦 ⎥ = ⎢ ⋮ ⎥                                                            (19)
        ⎢ 1 𝛥𝑥2 1 𝛥𝑦2 𝛥𝑥2 𝛥𝑦2 𝛥𝑥                                                   ⎢        ⎥
        ⎣2 𝑛 2 𝑛                                                 𝛥𝑦𝑛 ⎥⎦ ⎢ 𝑣,𝑥 ⎥ ⎣𝑣𝑛 − 𝑣0 ⎦
                                         𝑛  𝑛            𝑛                ⎢     ⎥ ⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
        ⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟ ⎣ 𝑣,𝑦 ⎦
                                       ̌                                  ⏟⏟⏟          ̌𝐛
                                       𝐀
                                                                             ̌
                                                                             𝐦
can be formulated. Here, the matrix 𝐀  ̌ summarizes the respective spatial increments of the neighboring points listed row-wise. The
column vector 𝐦 lists the derivatives to be determined (⋅),𝑗 = 𝜕(⋅)
                                                                 𝜕𝑗
                                                                    , while ̌𝐛 contains the differences of the function values between
the value in the reference point and its neighbors.
    In order to calculate the derivatives using the neighborhood relations, specific conditions regarding the spatial distribution of the
neighbors around the reference point must be satisfied which specify the stability and solvability of the equation system (19). Fore
more details, we refer to [42]. To avoid ill-conditioned equation systems, neighbors should be equally distributed around the point
of interest and more than the minimum of five neighboring points should be included. The simplest way to fulfill both requirements
is to take all neighboring data points in a specified radius around the point of interest and thus defining an overdetermined system
of Eq. (19). To this end, [42] introduced a weighted least square (WLS) approach is applied, so that an approximation of the system
of equations is achieved:
             ̌ T ⋅ 𝐖 ⋅ 𝐀)
        𝐦 = (𝐀                     ̌ T ⋅ 𝐖 ⋅̌𝐛.
                            ̌ −1 ⋅ 𝐀                                                                                                                (20)
            ⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
                         =∶ 𝐃 ̌∇

   The matrix 𝐃̌ ∇ is the pseudo inverse of the matrices 𝐀̌ with the diagonal matrix 𝐖 containing the weights of all included
neighboring points. The weighting matrix 𝐖 is formed from the respective weightings 𝑤(𝑑𝑖 ) of the neighboring points to the reference

                                                                                                5
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                                                        Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489

point, whereby these are based on the Euclidean distance 𝑑𝑖 = ‖𝐱𝑖 − 𝐱0 ‖2 .
          ⎡𝑤(𝑑1 )                0          0          ⋯        0 ⎤
          ⎢ 0                                                   0 ⎥                                                        (          )2
                               𝑤(𝑑2 )       0          ⋯                                                            ⎛                      ⎞
          ⎢                                                         ⎥                                                  1       4𝑑𝑖
        𝐖=⎢ 0                    0        𝑤(𝑑3 )       ⋯        0 ⎥                  with              𝑤(𝑑𝑖 ) = exp ⎜−         √           ⎟                                   (21)
          ⎢ ⋮                                                                                                       ⎜ 2          𝛽∗        ⎟
                                 ⋮          ⋮          ⋱        ⋮ ⎥                                                 ⎝                      ⎠
          ⎢                                                         ⎥
          ⎣ 0                    0          0          …      𝑤(𝑑𝑛 )⎦
    The weighting function 𝑤(𝑑𝑖 ) was introduced in [42] and fulfills the necessary properties by which neighboring points with
large distances exert a lower weighting on the reference point. The independent parameter 𝛽 ∗ controls the decay of the exponential
function and thus the distribution of the weights (0 ≤ 𝑤(𝑑𝑖 ) ≤ 1) on all neighboring points. We set this parameter equal to the
square of the search radius for neighbors around the reference point, which will be chosen accordingly to the mesh of the specific
discretized boundary value problem.
                                                      ̌ ∇ )1,𝑖 and (𝐃
                            ̌ ∇ , the first two rows (𝐃
    In the resulting matrix 𝐃                                       ̌ ∇ )2,𝑖 yield the information of the parts for the computation of the
Laplacian, i.e., the unmixed second spatial derivatives, whereby the respective neighborhood relations are contained in the columns.

3.3. Treatment of boundary quadrature points

    So far, only points within the area 𝛺void were treated. However, the Neumann boundary condition of the gradient in Eqs. (13)
and (16) have to be fulfilled on the boundary 𝜕𝛺void . For this purpose, we also include the quadrature points on the boundaries
of the domain as additional data points for the field variables. Thus, boundary points can also be applied as neighbors in the
equation system (19). However, since the Neumann boundary condition has to be fulfilled on these boundary points, the Neumann
                                                                                                                           ̄ which
boundary condition will be directly included as additional equation. This is expressed by an additional row in the matrix 𝐀,
is only assigned at the points located on the boundary 𝜕𝛺void . The outwards pointing surface normal in the (boundary) reference
point is denoted by 𝐧0 = (𝑛𝑥 , 𝑛𝑦 )T . In turn, since the computation of the deformation gradient at the boundary points requires to
solve Eqs. (13) and (16) which can become inconvenient, we assume the function value in the boundary points of interest 𝑣0 to be
unknown. The enhanced equation system for boundary points thus reads

                                                                                   ⎡𝑣,𝑥𝑥 ⎤
        ⎡ 1 𝛥𝑥21 1 𝛥𝑦21 𝛥𝑥21 𝛥𝑦21 𝛥𝑥1 𝛥𝑦1 1⎤ ⎢ 𝑣,𝑦𝑦 ⎥                                        ⎡ 𝑣1 ⎤
          2             2
        ⎢                                                                      ⎥ ⎢       ⎥   ⎢ ⎥
        ⎢   ⋮              ⋮               ⋮          ⋮            ⋮         ⋮ ⎥ ⋅ ⎢ ,𝑥𝑦 ⎥ = ⎢ ⋮ ⎥ ,
                                                                                    𝑣
          1             1                                                                                                                                                      (22)
        ⎢ 𝛥𝑥𝑛   2         𝛥𝑦𝑛 𝛥𝑥𝑛 𝛥𝑦𝑛 𝛥𝑥𝑛 𝛥𝑦𝑛 1⎥ ⎢ 𝑣,𝑥 ⎥
                               2           2   2                                             ⎢ 𝑣𝑛 ⎥
        ⎢2              2                                                      ⎥ ⎢       ⎥   ⎢0⎥
        ⎣ 0                0               0         𝑛𝑥           𝑛𝑦         0⎦ ⎢ 𝑣,𝑦 ⎥      ⎣ ⎦
        ⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟ ⎣ 𝑣0 ⎦ ⏟⏟⏟
                                            𝐀̄                                    ⏟⏟⏟          ̄𝐛
                                                                                     𝐦̄
which includes 𝑣0 as additional unknown in the vector 𝐦. ̄ Building the system of equation in (22), only inner points are considered
as neighbors for the boundary point. Since boundary points are predestined to coincide on one line in a spatial direction, this can
                                                                                                           ̄ and the weighting matrix
                                    ̄ or its condition number will increase at least [42]. With the matrix 𝐀
lead to a singularity of the matrix 𝐀,
                                               ̄
𝐖 from Eq. (21), the pseudoinverse matrix 𝐃∇ can now be calculated analogously to Eq. (20) as
             ̄ T ⋅ 𝐖 ⋅ 𝐀)
        𝐦 = (𝐀                     ̄ T ⋅ 𝐖 ⋅̄𝐛.
                            ̄ −1 ⋅ 𝐀                                                                                                                                           (23)
            ⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
                         =∶ 𝐃 ̄∇
                                               ̄ ∇ )6,𝑖 yields the information for the computation of the function values on the boundary
                           ̄ ∇ , the last row (𝐃
   In the resulting matrix 𝐃
points so that the homogeneous Neumann boundary conditions are fulfilled.

3.4. Equation system for the field functions for regularization

    The construction of a system of equations for the function values of inner points denoted by ̌⋅ and the boundary points denoted
by ̄⋅ is explained in this section. The discretized Laplacian from Eq. (20) has to be computed for the solution of the differential
equations (13) and (16) while the discretized computation of the unknown function values in the boundary point is given directly
by Eq. (23). Both set of equations are assembled into one governing matrix 𝐆, which has the size (𝑁̌̄ × 𝑁)          ̌̄ corresponding to the
                                           ̌                                     ̄        ̌
                                                                                          ̄   ̌    ̌
total number of inner quadrature points 𝑁 and outer quadrature points 𝑁 with 𝑁 = 𝑁 + 𝑁. As mentioned before, the neighbored
information for an inner point is given in the rows (𝐃              ̌ ∇ )2,𝑖 . Therein, each entry refers to one neighbor 𝑖 of the reference
                                                      ̌ ∇ )1,𝑖 and (𝐃
point 𝑘. Now, this information will be stored in the corresponding row 𝑘 of the governing matrix, whereby the column 𝑖 refers the
global number of the neighbor point, i.e.,
                              ̌ ∇ )2,𝑖 .
                  ̌ ∇ )1,𝑖 + (𝐃
        (𝐆)𝑘,𝑖 = (𝐃                                                                                                                                                            (24)

    For the entry of the reference inner point itself, we evaluate the sum of the rows.
                         𝑛 (
                         ∑                       )
        (𝐆)𝑘,𝑘 ∶= −                      ̌ ∇ )2,𝑖 .
                             ̌ ∇ )1,𝑖 + (𝐃
                            (𝐃                                                                                                                                                 (25)
                         𝑖=1


                                                                                                  6
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                              Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489

    The boundary points are treated in the same manner. Resulting from the neighbored information for a boundary point given in
 ̄ ∇ )6,𝑖 , each entry 𝑖 will be stored in the corresponding column of the governing matrix, whereby the row 𝑘 refers to the current
(𝐃
reference point, i.e.,
                  ̄ ∇ )6,𝑖 .
        (𝐆)𝑘,𝑖 = (𝐃                                                                                                                                  (26)

    Accordingly, the entry of the reference boundary point itself reads
                         ∑
                         𝑛
        (𝐆)𝑘,𝑘 ∶= −               ̄ ∇ )6,𝑖 .
                                 (𝐃                                                                                                                  (27)
                          𝑖=1

   By counting the global number of inner quadrature points first and subsequently the number of boundary quadrature points, the
governing matrix 𝐆 naturally arises as partition in the form
          [         ]
            ̌̌ 𝐆
            𝐆    ̄̌
      𝐆= ̌        ̄                                                                                                        (28)
            𝐆̄ 𝐆

    Therein, the partition 𝐆̌̌ stores only the neighbored information between inner points. Likewise, the partition 𝐆      ̄ contains only
neighbored information between boundary points. Since boundary points don not have another boundary points as neighbors, this
partition only has entries on its main diagonal. Furthermore, the partitions 𝐆   ̄̌ and 𝐆̌̄ contain the neighbored information from outer
on inner and inner on outer points, respectively.
    For the computation of the Laplacian, the function values in boundary points have to be known. In [42], this was done in a
‘‘spatially staggered’’ manner for an explicit time discretization: first, matrix 𝐆 ̌̄ was multiplied with the function values of the inner
points from the previous time (load) step, i.e., explicit time discretization, to compute the function values in the outer points:
                  ̌̄ ⋅ [𝑣̌ ] .
        [𝑣̄ 𝑖 ] = 𝐆                                                                                                                                  (29)
                          𝑖

    In a second computation step, i.e., ‘‘spatially staggered’’, the Laplacian for the inner points was computed by multiplying the
combined vectors for the function values from the previous time (load) step and the function values in the boundary points computed
in the first step with the upper partition of 𝐆:
                   [      ] [ ]
       [∇2 𝑣̌ 𝑖 ] = 𝐆   ̄̌ ⋅ [𝑣̌ 𝑖 ] .
                     ̌̌ 𝐆                                                                                                      (30)
                             [𝑣̄ 𝑖 ]
  Since the differential equation at hand do not contain any transient terms, we combine the two operations (29) and (30) via a
multiplication into a condensed system matrix:
       ([          ] [     ]) [                         ]    [     ]
           ̌̌ 𝐆 ̄̌     𝐈 𝟎        𝐆̌̌ ⋅ 𝐈 + 𝐆      ̄̌ 𝟎
                                              ̌̄ ⋅ 𝐆           𝐋 𝟎
          𝐆
                    ⋅ ̌       =            ̌̄             =∶   ̌̄ 𝟎 ,                                                      (31)
           𝟎    𝐈     𝐆̄ 𝟎                𝐆           𝟎       𝐆
whereby the reformulated partition reads
          ̌̌ ⋅ 𝐈 + 𝐆
        𝐋=𝐆             ̄̌ .
                   ̌̄ ⋅ 𝐆                                                                                                                            (32)
                                                              ̌ now corresponds to the total number of inner quadrature points.
   Finally, we derive the operator matrix 𝐋, whose size (𝑁̌ × 𝑁)
This matrix enables the computation of the Laplacian in every discretized inner point via

        ∇2 𝑣̌ = 𝐋 ⋅ [𝑣̌ 𝑖 ],                                                                                                                         (33)

while fulfilling the homogeneous Neumann boundary condition inherently which are given by Eqs. (12) and (15). By defining the
mesh of the void domain, its boundary is known and can be incorporated by the described scheme above. Even complex geometries
can be considered as long as the boundary of the void domain is defined. For implementing boundary conditions other than the
homogeneous Neumann boundary conditions, a reformulation of Eq. (31) is necessary, i.e., for multiphysics approaches [36]. The
reformulation has to consider the given gradient terms on the boundary such that their values are incorporated in the neighbored
information. However, since the FDM is defined on a spatial discretization of the quadrature points, also a non-periodic boundary
condition could be applied. According to the strong form of the field functions for the regularization given in Eqs. (13) and (16),
the discretized Laplacian can now be implemented by the system matrix 𝐋. Since the system matrix is based on the discretization
of the inner quadrature points, we will discretize the field variables 𝑝 and 𝑞 analogously. Therefore, we write the field variables as
vector lists 𝐩 and 𝐪.

        𝐩 = [𝑝1 , 𝑝2 , … , 𝑝𝑛 ]T               𝐪 = [𝑞1 , 𝑞2 , … , 𝑞𝑛 ]T                                                                              (34)
                                                                                          ̌ Analogously, the rotation angles and
   These vectors contain the value of each referenced discretized inner point 𝑖 ∈ {1, … , 𝑁}.
Jacobians in each discretized point can be formulated as vector lists as well.

        𝜱 = [tan(𝜑(𝐅1 )), tan(𝜑(𝐅2 )), … , tan(𝜑(𝐅𝑛 ))]T                  𝑱 = [𝐽1 , 𝐽2 , … , 𝐽𝑛 ]T                                                   (35)

    Eq. (13) can then be formulated in its discretized form as a system of equations as
           𝛼𝑝
       𝐩− 𝐋⋅𝐩=𝜱               ⇔           𝐋𝑝 ⋅ 𝐩 = 𝜱 ,                                                                                               (36)
           𝛽𝑝

                                                                                    7
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                      Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489




                             Fig. 1. Flowchart of the solving method, the staggered approach is highlighted.



with the system matrix
                𝛼𝑝
       𝐋𝑝 ∶= 𝐈 − 𝐋 .                                                                                                                         (37)
                𝛽𝑝
   Likewise, Eq. (16) can be formulated equally:
           𝛼𝑞
       𝐪− 𝐋⋅𝐪=𝑱               ⇔         𝐋𝑞 ⋅ 𝐪 = 𝑱 ,                                                                                         (38)
           𝛽𝑞
with the system matrix
                𝛼𝑞
       𝐋𝑞 ∶= 𝐈 − 𝐋 .                                                                                                                         (39)
                𝛽𝑞

    As shown in Eqs. (37) and (39), the system matrix 𝐋□ gains an additional superscript, which indicates the applied field function
regularization □ ∈ {𝑝, 𝑞}. Since both field variables are based on the same discretization, the system matrix 𝐋□ has to be computed
only once, for a given spatial discretization, i.e., a given mesh. Furthermore, as long as the penalty parameters 𝛼□ and 𝛽□ , with
□ ∈ {𝑝, 𝑞}, remain constant during computations, only the right-hand side of the linear equation system for the update of the field
variables 𝑝 and 𝑞 changes and according, decompositions can be applied, e.g., LU-decomposition. Fig. 1 shows the solving method
of the NEM, which combines the FEM and FDM in a staggered manner.
    In this work, the specific implementation of the FDM is performed as followed. Firstly, the geometry of the contact bodies as well
as the intermediate domain has to be discretized whereby both together represent the governing mesh. Since only the void domain
has to be considered for building the system matrix 𝐋, we generate an overlaying mesh which matches the spatial coordinates of

                                                                   8
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                      Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489




                                     Fig. 2. C-Box in initial configuration and boundary conditions.



the void domain in the governing mesh. It is important to note that this overlaying mesh is only used to build the system matrix 𝐋.
The boundary of the overlaying mesh can be easily determined and discretized with one spatial dimension lower than the elements
within the domain. From here on, the quadrature points within the elements as well as on the boundary are treated as described
above, for the inner points and boundary points respectively. Finally, the penalty parameters must be applied to the system matrix,
according to Eqs. (37) and (39), resulting in the system matrices 𝐋𝑝 and 𝐋𝑞 for the respective field variables. The penalty parameters
𝛼□ and 𝛽□ with □ ∈ {𝑝, 𝑞} have to be tuned manually for the given boundary problem, which follows in the next chapter.

4. Numerical examples

4.1. Common parameters

    In this section we discuss the results based on the new approach. We will show that the new approach is able to derive self-
contact in structures, but within significantly less computation time compared to the monolithic approach in [32]: herein, each
node in the void domain are attributed the field variables 𝑝 and 𝑞 as additional degrees of freedom. All simulations are based on
two dimensional quadrilateral elements with a first order shape function. By using the first order shape functions, the regularization
of the Jacobian could be omitted, according to [32]. Nevertheless, we retain this regularization on every simulation showed here,
since by its implementation a smoother distribution of the volumetric deformation of the void elements was observed. The FEM
problem will be solved with a classical Newton–Raphson approach, whereby the convergence criteria for the residual norm is given
by 1𝑒−8 . The associated parameters for the regularization will be given for each boundary problem separately.
                                                     5
    Furthermore, the engineering parameters 𝜇 = 14     and 𝐾 = 56 maintain constant. The solid elements will be illustrated in red,
while gray declare void elements. All simulations were computed using the Julia programming language [45], with the package
Ferrite being used for the FEM and the package NearestNeighbors for the search of neighboring points within the NEM.

4.2. Results for the C-Box

    The C-Box, originally based on [23], is shown in Fig. 2. The void domain is enclosed from solid beams from three sides while
the left outer boarder is fixed and a point-wise displacement load at the upper right corner on the solid domain is applied. An
initial displacement 𝐮 = [0.0, −1𝑒−3 ] is applied at the free end of the upper beam. The displacement will be increased by 𝑢𝑦 = −1𝑒−3
after each converged Newton–Raphson iteration. No body forces are considered. The box has a height of 𝐻 = 1.0 and a length of
𝐿 = 2.0, whereby the thickness of the beams in all sections is 𝐵 = 0.2. The mesh is composed of 800 linear quadrilateral elements.
The marked positions on the inner sides of the beams are used to compute the minimal gap during contact. Due to the second-order
quadrature rule for the numerical integration, each individual element contains four quadrature points. Two quadrature points per
element surface are defined on the boundary region of the void domain 𝜕𝛺void .
    Based on the C-Box problem, we want to compare the presented NEM approach with the monolithic approach from [32]. For
each simulation, a total number of 2000 load steps were preset. The chosen parameters for the regularization are given in Table 1.

                                                                   9
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                   Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489

                           Table 1
                           Parameters for the C-Box problem.
                             Approach         𝛾                𝛼𝑝            𝛽𝑝           𝛼𝑞             𝛽𝑞
                             Monolithic       1.0𝑒−6           100.0         10 000.0     100.0          1.0
                             NEM              1.0𝑒−6           1000.0        10 000.0     10.0           0.1




Using the same set of penalty parameters for both approaches did not lead a stable convergence in at least one of the approaches.
Due to the different spatial discretization of the parameters 𝑝 and 𝑞 and since the parameter 𝛼𝑝 and 𝛼𝑞 slightly change their reference
for the NEM approach, see (37), the actual factor for the Laplacian matrix 𝐋 resulting from the division of 𝛼□ and 𝛽□ with □ ∈ {𝑝, 𝑞}
should be accounted for. According to the parameters given in Table 1, the resulting factor for the NEM approach is equivalent to
the monolithic approach in the case for the variable 𝑞, but significantly smaller in the case for the variable 𝑝. However, it will be
shown that the results fulfill the entitled contact development.
    Some characteristic deformation states of the C-Box problem are shown in Fig. 3, whereby the results of the NEM approach
are given on the left hand side, and the results of the monolithic approach are given on the right hand side. It can be seen, that
in both cases the contact occurs as expected. At first, the void elements will be contracted homogeneously before the lower tip of
the upper beam touches the lower beam. Then, the lower beam starts to bend down due to the contact, while the contact point
travels alongside the upper side of the lower beam. It is important to note that no self-penetrations of the solid elements occurs in
the contact area during all load steps. With even larger deformations, the contact area extends, by increasing its area to a line to
line contact. Its worth to mention, that for the NEM approach the load increment near the end of the deformation state had to be
                             𝑢
decreased by one tenth to 10𝑦 to remain stable.
    Evidently, both approaches lead to the same general contact behavior and their deformations are approximately identical, except
for slight deviations in the deformation of the outer void domain on the right hand side of the box, although they just appearing
during the first contact development. However, the gap width gives a more detailed information about the behavior of the void
domain. The propagation of the gap width is shown in Fig. 4, whereby the path according to the NEM approach fits the results of
the monolithic approach. A closer look after the 500th load step reveals a discrepancy between the results. Herein, the gap width
of the NEM approach decreases less over the load steps. This difference only appears when the first contact is made, i.e., the point
to line contact. According to the graph in detail in Fig. 5, the maximum difference is in the order of 0.0267, which is considered
to be negligible. When it comes to the line to line contact between the bars, closely after the 1250th load step, the path of the
NEM approach shows no significant deviation to the monolithic approach. Both paths tends to slightingly increase towards the end
deformation, close after the 1750th load step. This can be explained with imperfections in the line to line contact, meaning that
other points between the bars are in a closer contact. This effect is considered as plausible since points which are closer to each
other in a line contact could cause reaction moments which, in turn, can open the gab.
    A further comparison is given in Fig. 6, whereby the NEM approach programmed with Ferrite in Fig. 6(a) is compared with an
augmented Lagrangian approach computed in ANSYS in Fig. 6(b). Both calculations are set up with the same material model and
material parameters. Furthermore, the same amount of load steps was applied in both cases and a classical Newton–Raphson solver
was used. Since the augmented Lagrangian approach is based on a predefined contact area, all lines of the inner C-Box are referred
to each other to ensure the same contact development, unlike the TMC approach, where the third medium enables the contact. Due
to this reason, the third medium, e.g., void elements, are not displayed in the plot in Fig. 6(a) for a better comparison between these
approaches. Beside this difference in the formulation of the contact problem, the discretization and boundary conditions given in
Fig. 2 are likewise implemented in ANSYS.
    The comparison in Fig. 6 shows a similar deformation state resulting from both approaches. In both cases, the upper bar and
lower bar undergo a point-to-line contact as well as a line-to-line contact. It is important to note that in both approaches a stable
convergence during all load steps was observed. Evidently, the TMC approach is able to provide a similar contact behavior as the
augmented Lagrangian approach in ANSYS but without the need for prescribed contact areas.
    The investigation of the C-Box, discussed above leads to the following conclusion: in consideration of a slightly different
deformation of the void domain as well as the discrepancy in the propagation of the gap width, the introduced NEM approach
is able to handle the same contact problem as the monolithic approach. For the cause of the differences, it has to be mentioned that
the results depend on the choice of the regularization parameter. Furthermore, due to the staggered manner of the NEM approach,
the update of the field variables 𝑝 and 𝑞 is carried out after each converged Newton–Raphson step, such that the solution of the
field variables is always one step behind the momentary configuration, in contrast to the monolithic approach. According to the
stability of the convergence, each load step converged after four Newton–Raphson iterations, except for one of the last load steps
in the NEM approach. Hereby, the refinement of the load increment 𝑢𝑦 occurred after which the load steps converged after four
Newton–Raphsons loops again. Still, the approach exhibit an overall robust convergence.

4.3. Results for the bending bars

   We investigate the contact behavior of our method on a second example. As shown in Fig. 7, the setup is defined by two vertical
bars which are fixed at their bottoms and one horizontal bar is placed above with an initial gap of 0.1. It is indented that the lower
bars are placed asymmetrically to the center of the upper bar, which is referenced by the green dashed line. The purpose of the
asymmetric setup is to create two independent contact zones, which undergo different contact behavior. All bars are embedded in

                                                                        10
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                        Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489




      Fig. 3. Comparison of the deformation states of the C-Box, resulting from the NEM approach (left) and monolithic approach (right).




                                                                     11
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                     Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489




                              Fig. 4. Comparison of the propagation of the gap width during the simulation.




                           Fig. 5. Comparison of the propagation of the gap width during the end deformation.



void domain, so that a contact could develop at any intersection between the bars. The parameters for the void regularization are
listed in Table 2. The entire domain is discretized by a mesh of 3200 quadrilateral elements. As before, each element is described
with a second-order geometric quadrature and therewith holds four quadrature points. The initial condition is given by the point-
wise applied displacement 𝐮 = [0.0, −1𝑒−3 ] at the center of the upper bar. After each converged load step, the displacement will be
increased by 𝑢𝑦 = −1𝑒−3 whereby no body forces are considered. The incremental loading was used likewise for each approach and
a total number of 1000 load steps were preset.
    The comparison of characteristic deformation states based on the NEM approach and monolithic approach is given in Fig. 9. Both
simulations result in very similar deformations of the bars during all load steps. With the last load step the upper bar undergoes a
displacement of 𝑢𝑦 ≈ −1.2, referencing the lower point at the center of the bar, which is more than the half of the size of the domain.
However, a closer examination of the last deformation state shows that the results from the NEM approach in Fig. 9(g) tend to a more
compressed bending of the upper bar in comparison to the monolithic approach in Fig. 9(h). Since both simulations used the same
set of material parameters for the solid, it is to assume that the void domain holds a noticeable influence on the global deformation.

                                                                   12
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                        Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489




                          Fig. 6. Comparison of the C-Box problem results between Ferrite (a) and ANYSY (b).




                                           Fig. 7. Initial setup of the bending bar problem.


                                                                  13
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                      Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489

                            Table 2
                            Parameters for the bending bar problem.
                             Approach          𝛾            𝛼𝑝                𝛽𝑝              𝛼𝑞            𝛽𝑞
                             Monolithic        1.0𝑒−6       100.0             10 000.0        100.0         0.1
                             NEM               1.0𝑒−6       1 000 000.0       10 000.0        10.0          0.1




                          Fig. 8. Comparison of the bending bar problem results between Ferrite (a) and ANSYS (b).



Nevertheless, the void domain shows significant differences between both approaches. Every characteristic deformation state in Fig.
9 presents clearly that the rotation as well as the inflation of the void elements seems to be less regularized in the NEM approach.
According to Fig. 9(c) the void elements on the right-hand side undergoing the opposite rotation in comparison to the monolithic
approach in Fig. 9(d). Furthermore, an uneven distribution of the element volumes on the right-hand side as well as between the
vertical bars is noticeable. These effects become even more significant with further load steps, namely the narrowing of the void
elements at the lower right corner and their inflation as direct neighbors of solid elements.
    Evidently, these effects are explainable by application of a staggered approach accompanying the different choice of the
parameters in Table 2 to grant numerical stability. It has to be emphasized that the actual deformation state of the void elements
has no priority in the sense of physical accuracy, i.e., only the deformation and contact in between the solid domains is of interest.
The void regions are mere numerical auxiliaries and their explicit behavior is not of any interest. Nevertheless, the NEM approach
shows minor differences in the solid deformations compared to the monolithic approach, while stable convergence was observed. It
is worth mentioning that within four Newton–Raphson iterations each load step converged. Even for finer meshes, the number of
iterations per load steps did not enlarge significantly, only by one to two additional iterations in some load steps.
    Another comparison with a conventional method is given in Fig. 8. Herein, the end deformation state of the bending bar problem
is plotted for the NEM approach, see Fig. 8(a). The third medium elements, e.g., the void elements are hidden in the plot for a
clearer comparison with the results of the augmented Lagrangian approach in Fig. 8(b). Both simulations are based on the same
discretization, given in Fig. 7, and material parameters. Furthermore, the step size of the load increment was chosen equally in each
simulation. In contrast to the NEM approach, the contact areas in the augmented Lagrangian approach are predefined, whereby
every line of each bar was referred to each other, if the development of a contact between them could be possible. Especially, every
point, i.e., the upper corners from the vertical bars have to be referred to the line, i.e., the underside if the horizontal bar. This is
necessary to ensure that these points do not penetrate the upper bar.
    The comparison in Fig. 8 shows a very similar deformation state between the results from the NEM approach and augmented
Lagrangian approach. Both approaches are able to develop geometrical point-to-line contact as well as line-to-line contact between
the bars. However, the augmented Lagrangian approach shows a wider bending of the upper bar and therewith a more defined line-
to-line contact to the left vertical bar. This difference of the deformation state is explainable by the penalty parameters of the NEM
approach. It is important to note that the NEM approach shows in fact a sensitivity to the penalty parameters, like the monolithic
approach. As a consequence, a tuning of these parameters has to be provided. Still, a very close approximation of the displacement
state and the contact development is evidently. Furthermore, the results of the monolithic approach proves this comparison, cf. Figs.
8(b) and 9(h).
    The NEM approach and monolithic approach resulting in the same propagation of the contact. Fig. 9 shows clearly that both
methods describe the same contact in each characteristic load step. The right bar gets first into a line contact with the horizontal
bar while the left bar undergoes a point contact, i.e., Figs. 9(a) to 9(d). Interestingly, these geometrical contacts change with lager
deformations: from a line contact to a point contact and vise versa, compare Figs. 9(c) with 9(e) and Figs. 9(d) with 9(f). The
change of contact area was already shown with the C-Box problem, but the bending bars problem prove that the TMC formulation
also works for multiple solid bodies which are embedded in one void domain. Nevertheless, with the implementation of the NEM, it
will be shown that this approach comes with a reduction of the computation time, while it results in comparable contact behavior
as the monolithic approach.

                                                                      14
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                          Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489




                          Fig. 9. Comparison of the results for the bending bar problem.



                                                       15
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                      Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489




Fig. 10. Comparison of the computation time to solve the displacement 𝐮 and update the field variables 𝑝 and 𝑞 with the monolithic approach
and the NEM approach for ten different mesh refinements.



4.4. Comparison of computing times

    The new NEM approach is able to reproduce similar contact developments as the monolithic approach, as discussed before. In
this section, it will be shown that the advantage of the NEM approach lays in a reduction of the computation time. Therefore we
compare results of the bending bar problem from Section 4.3 with multiple refinements of the mesh. For a better comparison, we
refer in Fig. 10 to the computation time which only accounts for the solution of the solver, i.e., the computation of the displacements
and the regularization parameters, without accounting for the calculation time of pre-processing or post-processing. Furthermore, we
will refer each computation time to the total number of elements, since the total number of degrees of freedom would be misleading
due to the varying discretization of the regularization parameters within both approaches: it is important to note that the monolithic
approach introduced two additional degrees of freedom in each node of a void element, namely the field variables 𝑝 and 𝑞. Since
the NEM approach condense out these field variables as degrees of freedom in each element, they no longer depend on the assembly
of the stiffness tangent, but are computed by solving the separated system of equations following from the NEM for each converged
load step. Thus, the total number of degrees of freedom cannot be compared directly between the NEM approach and the monolithic
approach.
    The mesh of the bending bar problem from Fig. 7 was set up for ten different mesh refinements, with the smallest number of
quadrilateral elements of 3200 up to the largest number of quadrilateral elements of 720 000. Regarding to the minimal number of
nearest neighbors, according to the theory of the NEM, the global search radius for the neighbored area of a quadrature point was
preset for each refined mesh, such that the condition of at least five neighbors was fulfilled. As it was mentioned in the origin work
of [32], the simulation of the contact problem with the TMC method tends to instabilities when its applied to fine meshes. This
effect could also be observed in the present work. However, since we want to evaluate the reduction of the computing time, we
adjust a total number of load steps to 150 so that a contact was initiated, but also the simulation of all mesh refinements are stable.
Clearly, the computation time will increase by solving more load steps, but by setting the total number of load steps we propose a
more reasonable time comparison. As before, the NEM approach and monolithic approach make use of the same load increments.
No adaptive refinement of the load increment was observed during the simulation for any given mesh.
    An overview of the computation time to solve the displacements 𝐮 is given in Fig. 10, whereby the marker indicates the respective
approach. Reasonable, the computation time will increase with a larger number of elements. Herein, it is to be assumed that the
computation time increases cubically with the number of degrees of freedom for both approaches since both are using the FEM.
Nevertheless, the resulting graph of the monolithic approach does not follow an exact exponential path, specially noticeable due to
the jump at the last two meshes. By using the standard solver in the program language Julia, it could be the case that the program
used another poly-algorithm for the division of the stiffness matrix is at a larger number of degrees of freedom. However, we used the
same solver algorithm for both approaches so that the results are comparable. It is remarkable that the NEM approach significantly
faster than the monolithic approach for every given mesh. The factor of computational time saving goes up to six and a half, in
the presented diagram. Evidently this factor will also increase with finer meshes, i.e., larger numbers elements. This effect would
be even more evident for three-dimensional problems. The reason for this saving of computational time results from the staggered
method enabled due to the NEM approach. Thereby it is much faster to solve the field variables with an equation systems, defined

                                                                    16
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                     Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489




Fig. 11. Comparison of the computation time to solve the displacement 𝐮 with the FEM and the field variables 𝑝 and 𝑞 with the FDM for ten
different mesh refinements.



by the information of neighbored quadrature points than applying each field variable as an additional degree of freedom. This is
also shown in Fig. 11 where the computation time to solve the displacement field 𝐮 is split into the FEM part and FDM part. The
computation of the field variables with the FDM only needs a fraction of time in comparison to the FEM, i.e., up to a factor of 28 for
the finest shown mesh. Even for finer meshes, this factor will drastically increase, since the computation time to solve the equation
system for the field variables increases linear.
    However, staggered approaches tend to be less accurate or unstable for smaller time increments [36]. But in the shown case,
even the monolithic approach required smaller load increments to provide stable convergence. The results of both approaches
are consistent, except for minor deviations for very large deformation states. Thus, we assume that the drawback of the potential
requirement of smaller time increments for the staggered NEM approach is not relevant and that it will be computationally more
efficient in most cases.
    A further detailed investigation of the computational performance is given in Fig. 12 which presents the total computation time
for the Newton–Raphson solver in Fig. 12(a), the total computation time for assembling the residual vector and the stiffness matrix
in Fig. 12(b), the total allocated memory per load step in Fig. 12(c), and the allocated memory for the assembling in Fig. 12(d).
    Its important to note that a significant saving of computational costs by the NEM approach is evident in all diagrams in Fig. 12.
The saving of the total computation time for the Newton–Raphson solver is up to a factor of four, for the finest mesh in Fig. 12(a).
In case of the assembling of the residual vector and the stiffness matrix in Fig. 12(b), the computation time reduced by half. It is
important to mention that this aspect of the computation part depends on the problem size, or more precisely the number of third
medium elements, i.e., the number of void elements. Since the monolithic approach solves the field variables as additional degrees
of freedom in the nodes, the residual vector and the stiffness matrix increase in size and so does the necessary computation time. Due
to the NEM approach, the field variables are not additionally assembled and the size of the residual vector and the stiffness matrix is
determined by the degrees of freedom of the displacement 𝐮 only. Consequently, if the governing mesh includes more void domains
than solid bodies, the excluded degrees of freedom from the assembling increases. Hence the computation time drops. Furthermore,
Figs. 12(c) and 12(d) both show a reduction of the allocated memory by half. However, the comparison of the allocated memory is
given here for the sake of completeness. Obviously, this aspect goes along with the problem size and the code performance, whereby
the presented approaches are coded in the similar manner. Nevertheless, in [36], a reduction factor of 77 for the allocated memory
was achieved in ANSYS, which shows the potential of the NEM approach.
    If now the discretization of the domain would be constant, i.e., the number of elements does not change, it is argumentatively
reasonable that the time saving depends on the ratio of void to solid elements, knowing that for each void element more field
variables have to be assigned. By this means, it can be postulate that the NEM approach will be even faster if the void to solid ratio
will increase. This comes with the advantage to apply a larger void domain, i.e., to enable the development of further contact zones
without the same increasing computation time as with the monolithic approach.
    As mentioned before, the computation times for the pre-process and the post-process are omitted, in all presented comparisons.
Obviously the handling of the data for the post-process is subject to the point of interest of the user and thus its associated
computation time. However, in the case for the pre-process, it has to be noted that the building of the matrices for the NEM system
𝐋□ with □ ∀ {𝑝, 𝑞}, claims a non-negligible amount of computation time. The necessary computation time depends on the number

                                                                   17
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                     Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489




                Fig. 12. Comparison of the computational costs component wise for the monolithic approach and NEM approach.



of quadrature points. Thus, the required time is similar to the order of magnitude of the time to assemble the whole stiffness matrix
within the FEM approach. However, the matrix 𝐋□ has to build and decomposed just once for a given spatial discretion and set
of regularization parameters, i.e., 𝛼□ and 𝛽□ with □ ∈ {𝑝, 𝑞}. Eventually, it should be emphasizes that the necessary computation
time to build and decompose the system matrix 𝐋□ does not have a major share in the time compared with the whole simulation
process.
    The time comparison proves the reduction of the computation time by applying the NEM approach. It is important to note that
the mesh refinements were equal in both material domains, i.e., the solid and void phase. As explained before, the time reduction
is based on the condescension of the field variables from a additional degree of freedom to a separate equation system which can
be solved efficiently by a LU-decomposition.

4.5. Results for the ring

    The third example we investigate with our method is shown in Fig. 13. Therein, a half of an elastic ring with an outer radius
𝑟 = 1.0 and a thickness of 0.1 is moved towards an elastic fundament. Both solid bodies are colored in red, while the third medium
is shown in gray. Marked by the green point and line, the lowest point of the ring and the upper line of the fundament are utilized
to determine the gab between them. It important to note that they are only used for the post-process. The initial gap between the
bodies is 0.1. Furthermore, both solid bodies share the same material behavior, i.e., the formulation of the strain energy in Eq.
(2). The initial condition is given by a point-wise applied displacement 𝐮 = [0.0, −1𝑒−3 ] at the upper part of the ring. After each
converged load step, the displacement will be increases by 𝑢𝑦 = −1𝑒−3 whereby no body forces are consider. Since the upper part
of the ring is only able to be displaced in the 𝑦 direction, the horizontal diameter of the ring is fixed. Consequently, if the ring gets
into contact with the fundament it will undergo large deformations, since the structural compliance of the ring is significantly lower
against the compliance of the fundament. Furthermore, it is assumed that the ring will snap back if its compressed further onto the
fundament. A variation of the penalty parameters is intended to investigate their influence on the stability of the NEM approach
and its results.
    An detailed investigation of the penalty parameters was already provided by [32]. In case of the NEM approach, the penalty
parameters 𝛼□ and 𝛽□ with □ ∀ {𝑝, 𝑞} have the same effect on the regularization as for the monolithic approach, namely that
the field variable 𝑝 regularizes the rotation of the third medium elements and 𝑞 regularizes their volumetric change. However, it
was observed that the value of the penalty parameters has to be adjusted in order to achieve a similar regularization, i.e., contact
development as in the monolithic approach. An excerpt of this is already given in Table 1 for the C-Box and in Table 2 for the
bending bar problem. Based on the ring problem, we want to observe the influence of the penalty parameters on the gap width and
the deformation state to provide a guideline for a parameter selection. The investigated penalty parameter sets are given in Table 3.
    The parameter sets in Table 3 are sampled whereby a significant change of the ratio between both penalty parameter pairs is
taken into account. The resulting deformation state is given in Fig. 14, referred to each set of parameters in Table 3. Since all results
show a similar minimal gap width, the main aspect of evaluation is the deflection of the ring.

                                                                    18
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                         Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489




                                                 Fig. 13. Initial setup of the ring problem.


                           Table 3
                           Parameter sets for the ring problem.
                            Reference        𝛾            𝛼𝑝                 𝛽𝑝                𝛼𝑞            𝛽𝑞
                            Fig.   14(a)     1.0𝑒−6       10.0               100.0             10.0          0.1
                            Fig.   14(b)     1.0𝑒−6       1000.0             10 000.0          10.0          0.1
                            Fig.   14(c)     1.0𝑒−6       1 000 000.0        100 000.0         10.0          0.1
                            Fig.   14(d)     1.0𝑒−6       1000.0             10 000.0          1.0𝑒−6        10.0
                            Fig.   14(e)     1.0𝑒−6       1 000 000.0        10 000.0          1.0𝑒−5        100.0
                            Fig.   14(f)     1.0𝑒−6       1000.0             10 000.0          1.0𝑒−5        100.0
                            Fig.   14(g)     1.0𝑒−6       10.0               10 000.0          1.0𝑒−5        100.0
                            Fig.   14(h)     1.0𝑒−6       10.0               100.0             1.0𝑒−5        100.0




    Comparing the deformation states in the Figs. 14(a), 14(b), 14(c), 14(d) and 14(h) shows that the according parameter sets lead
to very similar results. All of these five parameter sets enable a proper contact and a lifting of the ring, although the magnitude
of deflection is in a smaller order. Comparing the referred parameter sets in Table 3, it is important to note that the ratio of 𝛼𝑞
and 𝛽𝑞 has not a significant influence on the result, while the values of 𝛼𝑝 and 𝛽𝑝 are relatively small, cf. Figs. 14(a) and 14(h).
Likewise, if the ratio of 𝛼𝑞 and 𝛽𝑞 is relatively large, while the values of 𝛼𝑝 and 𝛽𝑝 are of a much higher order, the results seem not
                                                                                              𝛼
to be effected, cf. Figs. 14(c) and 14(d). Nevertheless, applying an even larger ratio of 𝛽𝑝 < 1 does not lead to better results, as
                                                                                               𝑝
it shows in Fig. 14(e). Thereby, the effect of a snap back was not enabled, although a proper contact was derived. It is clearly to
see that the heavy distortions of the void elements cause numerical instabilities. However, the NEM approach is still very sensitive
to the chosen penalty parameters, as can be seen by comparing Figs. 14(d) and 14(f). Thereby, the deflection of the ring in Fig.
14(f) is much larger than in Fig. 14(d), while each of their parameter ratios are equal, cf. Table 3. As a result, not only the ratio of
the parameters is effecting the result, but especially the value of the penalty parameter 𝛽𝑞 , i.e., the regularization of the Jacobian.
This is also evident by comparing Figs. 14(f) and 14(g), wherein both results show a large deflection but a smoother distortion of
the void elements in Fig. 14(g). Furthermore, the set up in Fig. 14(f) failed after 646 load steps, whereas the setup in Fig. 14(g)
converged over all preset 650 load steps. In conclusion, a small ratio of the penalty parameters leads to a larger deflection in the
presented example, while the regularization of the Jacobian, i.e., the ratio of 𝛼𝑞 and 𝛽𝑞 , has a more significant influence on the end
deformation state and therefore on the robustness of the NEM approach.
    Concluded, it can be reported that the parameter 𝛾 = 1.0𝑒−6 is quite optimal for the presented examples. It was observed that
smaller values of 𝛾 tend to a penetration of the solid bodies in the contact area and higher values results in a stiffening of the
third medium, i.e., the void elements stiffen even before a proper contact is developed. Furthermore, the convergence of the NEM
approach was much more sensitive to small changes of the penalty parameters 𝛼𝑞 and 𝛽𝑞 , i.e., the regularization of the Jacobian.
In contrast, a wider variation of the penalty parameters 𝛼𝑝 and 𝛽𝑝 , according for the regularized rotation, shows less influence on
the convergence behavior. Its important to mention that in general a small ratio of each penalty parameter pair, i.e., 𝛼□ < 𝛽□ with
□ ∀ {𝑝, 𝑞}, was leading to a more robust convergence towards the end deformation state. Furthermore, it was found that significant
smaller values of 𝛼𝑞 have a positive effect on the convergence robustness. Nevertheless, it should be noted that the influence of the
selected penalty parameters may vary depending on the type of problem.

                                                                        19
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                       Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489




Fig. 14. Comparison of the influence of the penalty parameters on the ring problem, showing each end deformation state according to the given
penalty parameters in Table 3.



                                                                     20
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                       Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489

5. Conclusion

     In this work, we introduced a novel numerical approach to the third medium contact (TMC) which introduces additional field
variables for regularization [32]. The primary advance of this work is the reduction of computation time for all cases examined by a
factor of up to four depending on the spatial discretization while contact behavior remains comparable to the previous approach. To
this end, the Neighbored Element Method (NEM) was applied to determine the unknown field variables with a spacial discretization,
i.e., the displacement field remains to be discretized by means of a finite element discretization whereas the field functions for
regularization are discretized within the quadrature points of the FEM mesh. The displacement field and the field functions are
solved in a staggered scheme in which the field functions are solved via a generalized finite difference scheme. The system matrix
for the solution of the field functions only depend on the spatial discretization and constant numerical parameters regarding the
regularization and can be thus build and decomposed once for a given problem yielding an overall very efficient numerical solution.
For this purpose, we had to introduced direct solution within the FDM, since previous applications only assumed explicit time
discretization for transient partial differential equations.
     Furthermore, it was shown that the NEM approach leads to the same results as the monolithic approach while it was likewise
stable under the same conditions. Furthermore, a comparison with an augmented Lagrangian approach carried out in ANSYS shows
a very close approximation of the deformation states. As for the monolithic approach in [32], results seem to be rather sensitive to
the chosen values for the penalty parameter, accounting for the regularization of the deformation of the void domain, which had
to be redefined for the NEM approach. Still, with the given selection of parameters for each problem, we were able to reproduce
similar contact behavior as with the monolithic approach and a negligible differences in the resulting gap width. A sampled set of
penalty parameters provides a guideline of the influence on the results. However, future work will tackle automated computation
of optimal penatly paramters and/or adaptive schemes for more user-friendly application.
     The here presented implementation of the NEM approach in the TMC enables a fast computation strategy to simulate frictionless
contact. Nevertheless, the selection of parameters has a significant influence on the deformation of the void domain, and with that –
although the actual deformation of void is irrelevant – they also have some influence on the contact development. Further research
is required on the behavior and optimal determination of the regularization parameters.
     One obvious further investigation is the enhancement to 3D elements. In [34], the regularization for 3D elements was achieved
by extending the energy term of the regularization by a skew part of the deformation gradient. Thereby, the symmetric skew-like
part leads to three components for the regularization which require three additional field variables, instead of just one field variable
in case of 2D elements. Herein, the NEM approach represents a promising alternative solution, since additional field variables are
not treated as additional degrees of freedom and consequently reduces the computational costs. The extension of a third spatial
coordinate on the search of neighbors in the FDM is simple. However, the enhanced regularization terms must be implemented in
the extended Hamilton principle subsequently. Since the NEM approach includes the classical FEM approach, other material models
can be applied for the solid elements. Furthermore, the adaptation of multiphysics is easy to handle with the NEM, shown in [36].
     Last but not least, introduction of friction in the contact area is a comprehensible aspect. Since the contact area is not predefined,
a spatial criteria for indicating friction is unsuitable. Rather, an additional strain energy, or respectively a regularization of the shear
stiffness of highly compressed void elements, seems to be more suitable for the TMC approach. Inspired by crystal plasticity the work
in [26] enabled friction by adding an anisotropic strain energy term. A similar extension of the formulation of internal energy for
the presented approach is also conceivable, but as a consequence, the additional energy term must be implemented in the extended
Hamilton principle.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

   Max von Zabiensky: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Software, Resources, Methodology, Conceptualization.
Dustin R. Jantos: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Methodology, Conceptualization. Philipp Junker: Writing – review &
editing, Supervision, Methodology, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

    The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
to influence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgments

   The authors gratefully acknowledge the funding by the German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG)
under Germany’s Excellence Strategy within the Cluster of Excellence PhoenixD (Project-ID 390833453). Additionally this work is
funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) - project number 512940050.

Data availability

    Data will be made available on request.



                                                                    21
M. von Zabiensky et al.                                                                                    Finite Elements in Analysis & Design 255 (2026) 104489

References

 [1]   Heinrich Hertz, Ueber die berührung fester elastischer körper, 1882.
 [2]   Peter Wriggers, Computational contact mechanics, Comput. Mech. 32 (1–2) (2003) 141.
 [3]   Zhong Zhi-Hua, Larsgunnar Nilsson, A contact searching algorithm for general contact problems, Comput. Struct. 33 (1) (1989) 197–209.
 [4]   Matthias Mayr, Alexander Popp, Scalable computational kernels for mortar finite element methods, Eng. Comput. 39 (5) (2023) 3691–3720.
 [5]   M.H. Refaat, S.A. Meguid, Updated Lagrangian formulation of contact problems using variational inequalities, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 40 (16)
       (1997) 2975–2993.
 [6]   Weimin Han, Mircea Sofonea, Numerical analysis of hemivariational inequalities in contact mechanics, Acta Numer. 28 (2019) 175–286.
 [7]   Peter Wriggers, Udo Nackenhorst, Analysis and Simulation of Contact Problems, Springer, 2006.
 [8]   Alexander Popp, Peter Wriggers, Contact Modeling for Solids and Particles, vol. 585, Springer, 2018.
 [9]   Vladislav A. Yastrebov, Numerical Methods in Contact Mechanics, John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
[10]   Tod A. Laursen, Computational Contact and Impact Mechanics: Fundamentals of Modeling Interfacial Phenomena in Nonlinear Finite Element Analysis,
       Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
[11]   Temesgen M. Kindo, Tod A. Laursen, John E. Dolbow, Toward robust and accurate contact solvers for large deformation applications: a remapping/adaptivity
       framework for mortar-based methods, Comput. Mech. 54 (2014) 53–70.
[12]   Jiazhao Huang, Nhon Nguyen-Thanh, Kun Zhou, An isogeometric-meshfree coupling approach for contact problems by using the third medium method,
       Int. J. Mech. Sci. 148 (2018) 327–336.
[13]   J.O. Hallquist, G.L. Goudreau, DJ822741 Benson, Sliding interfaces with contact-impact in large-scale Lagrangian computations, Comput. Methods Appl.
       Mech. Engrg. 51 (1–3) (1985) 107–137.
[14]   Nagi El-Abbasi, Klaus-Jürgen Bathe, Stability and patch test performance of contact discretizations and a new solution algorithm, Comput. Struct. 79 (16)
       (2001) 1473–1486.
[15]   Panayiotis Papadopoulos, Robert L. Taylor, A mixed formulation for the finite element solution of contact problems, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg.
       94 (3) (1992) 373–389.
[16]   Christine Bernardi, Naïma Debit, Yvon Maday, Coupling finite element and spectral methods: First results, Math. Comp. 54 (189) (1990) 21–39.
[17]   Christine Bernardi, Yvon Maday, Anthony T. Patera, Domain decomposition by the mortar element method, in: Asymptotic and Numerical Methods for
       Partial Differential Equations with Critical Parameters, Springer, 1993, pp. 269–286.
[18]   C. Bernardi, A new nonconforming approach to domain decomposition: ther mortar element method, Nonlinear Partial Differ. Equ. Appl. (1994) 1351.
[19]   Javier Oliver, S. Hartmann, J.C. Cante, R. Weyler, JA2536080 Hernandez, A contact domain method for large deformation frictional contact problems.
       Part 1: Theoretical basis, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 198 (33–36) (2009) 2591–2606.
[20]   S. Hartmann, Javier Oliver, R. Weyler, J.C. Cante, J.A. Hernández, A contact domain method for large deformation frictional contact problems. Part 2:
       Numerical aspects, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 198 (33–36) (2009) 2607–2631.
[21]   R. Weyler, J. Oliver, Trisha Sain, J.C. Cante, On the contact domain method: A comparison of penalty and Lagrange multiplier implementations, Comput.
       Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 205 (2012) 68–82.
[22]   P. Wriggers, J. Schröder, A. Schwarz, A finite element method for contact using a third medium, Comput. Mech. 52 (2013) 837–847.
[23]   Gore Lukas Bluhm, Ole Sigmund, Konstantinos Poulios, Internal contact modeling for finite strain topology optimization, Comput. Mech. 67 (2021)
       1099–1114.
[24]   Gore Lukas Bluhm, Ole Sigmund, Konstantinos Poulios, Inverse design of mechanical springs with tailored nonlinear elastic response utilizing internal
       contact, Int. J. Non-Linear Mech. 157 (2023) 104552.
[25]   Andreas H. Frederiksen, Anna Dalklint, Ole Sigmund, Konstantinos Poulios, Improved third medium formulation for 3D topology optimization with contact,
       Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 436 (2025) 117595.
[26]   Andreas H. Frederiksen, Ondřej Rokoš, Konstantinos Poulios, Ole Sigmund, Marc G.D. Geers, Adding friction to Third Medium Contact: A crystal plasticity
       inspired approach, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 432 (2024) 117412.
[27]   Andreas Henrik Frederiksen, Ole Sigmund, Konstantinos Poulios, Topology optimization of self-contacting structures, Comput. Mech. 73 (4) (2024) 967–981.
[28]   Ondřej Faltus, Martin Horák, Martin Doškář, Ondřej Rokoš, Third medium finite element contact formulation for pneumatically actuated systems, 2024,
       arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.01185.
[29]   Anna Dalklint, Joe Alexandersen, Andreas Henrik Frederiksen, Konstantinos Poulios, Ole Sigmund, Topology optimization of contact-aided
       thermo-mechanical regulators, Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 126 (2) (2025) e7661.
[30]   Yangjun Luo, Ming Li, Zhan Kang, Topology optimization of hyperelastic structures with frictionless contact supports, Int. J. Solids Struct. 81 (2016)
       373–382.
[31]   Quentin Le Lidec, Wilson Jallet, Louis Montaut, Ivan Laptev, Cordelia Schmid, Justin Carpentier, Contact models in robotics: a comparative analysis, IEEE
       Trans. Robot. (2024).
[32]   P. Wriggers, J. Korelc, Ph. Junker, A third medium approach for contact using first and second order finite elements, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg.
       436 (2025) 117740.
[33]   René De Borst, Mike A. Crisfield, Joris J.C. Remmers, Clemens V. Verhoosel, Nonlinear Finite Element Analysis of Solids and Structures, John Wiley &
       Sons, 2012.
[34]   Peter Wriggers, Jože Korelc, Ph. Junker, First order finite element formulations for third medium contact, Comput. Mech. (2025) 1–17.
[35]   Bing-Bing Xu, Peter Wriggers, Stabilization-free virtual element method for 2D third medium contact, 2025, arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.03630.
[36]   Tobias Rudolf, Felix Klempt, Hüray Ilayda Kök, Meisam Soleimani, Dustin Roman Jantos, Philipp Junker, Computational efficiency and accuracy of the
       Neighbored Element Method, Finite Elem. Anal. Des. 249 (2025) 104353.
[37]   Holm Altenbach, Kontinuumsmechanik, Springer, 2012.
[38]   Gerhard A. Holzapfel, Nonlinear solid mechanics: a continuum approach for engineering science, 2002.
[39]   Bojan J. Dimitrijevic, Klaus Hackl, A method for gradient enhancement of continuum damage models, Tech. Mech.-Eur. J. Eng. Mech. 28 (1) (2008)
       43–52.
[40]   Philipp Junker, Klaus Hackl, A variational growth approach to topology optimization, Struct. Multidiscip. Optim. 52 (2015) 293–304.
[41]   Peter Wriggers, Nichtlineare Finite-Element-Methoden, Springer-Verlag, 2013.
[42]   Mischa Blaszczyk, Dustin Roman Jantos, Philipp Junker, Application of Taylor series combined with the weighted least square method to thermodynamic
       topology optimization, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 393 (2022) 114698.
[43]   Dustin R. Jantos, Klaus Hackl, Philipp Junker, An accurate and fast regularization approach to thermodynamic topology optimization, Internat. J. Numer.
       Methods Engrg. 117 (9) (2019) 991–1017.
[44]   Philipp Junker, Stephan Schwarz, Dustin R. Jantos, Klaus Hackl, A fast and robust numerical treatment of a gradient-enhanced model for brittle damage,
       Int. J. Multiscale Comput. Eng. 17 (2) (2019).
[45]   Jeff Bezanson, Alan Edelman, Stefan Karpinski, Viral B. Shah, Julia: A fresh approach to numerical computing, SIAM Rev. 59 (1) (2017) 65–98.



                                                                              22
